RELEASING.adoc, before:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= RELEASING KUDU

== Overview

This document gives the steps required to perform a Kudu release, and is a
resource for Kudu release managers. Make sure to read and understand the
link:http://www.apache.org/legal/release-policy.html[ASF policy on software
releases] prior to conducting the release management activity. To edit or
update this document, edit `RELEASING.adoc` in `master`.

== Stating Intent to Release

. *A week before branching*: send an email to dev@kudu.apache.org to
  announce that the branch will be happening, including a deadline for when new
  commits will need gatekeeper approval.

. *A day before branching*: send another email to dev@kudu.apache.org
  to warn about it.

== Creating the Branch

. Create a new branch from `master`:
+
----
  git checkout master
  git pull
  git checkout -b branch-1.x.y
----

. Make a note of the SHA1 for the tip of the new branch, which is the first
  field of the result of this command:
+
----
  git log --oneline -n1
----

. Push the branch to public remotes https://github.com/cloudera/kudu.git and
  https://gitbox.apache.org/repos/asf/kudu.git. The following example assumes
  they are called `cloudera` and `apache`.
+
----
  git push cloudera branch-1.x.y
  git push apache branch-1.x.y
----

. Create a new branch on Gerrit. Go to
  http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/#/admin/projects/kudu,branches and create a
  new branch with the same name and the previously-noted SHA1.

. Ask someone with permissions to fix the gerrit.cloudera.org mirroring
  configuration. Cloudera hosts the Gerrit server and a Cloudera employee will
  have to perform this step because SSH access is behind a firewall. The steps
  are as follows:
  1. Ensure your public SSH key is in `~gerrit/.ssh/authorized_keys` on gerrit.cloudera.org
  2. From behind the firewall, `ssh gerrit@gerrit.cloudera.org` to log in.
  3. Back up the existing replication configuration file by executing
     `cp ~/etc/replication.config ~/etc/replication.config.bak.`date '+%Y%m%d.%H%M%S'``
  4. Edit `etc/replication.config` to add a line for the new branch, such as `branch-1.x.y`
  5. Send email to the dev lists for Kudu and Impala (dev@kudu.apache.org and
     dev@impala.apache.org) indicating that you are going to restart Gerrit
     (link:https://s.apache.org/2Wj7[example]). It is best to do the restart at
     some time of day when you don't expect many people to be using the system,
     since Gerrit can take a few minutes to restart.
  6. Restart Gerrit: `~/bin/gerrit.sh restart`
  7. Make sure Gerrit has been successfully restarted: after a few minutes,
     try to open the link:https://gerrit.cloudera.org/#/admin/projects[project list]
     page in your favorite browser.

. As needed, patches can be cherry-picked to the new branch.

== Updating Versions In Master

. Check out the `master` branch and bump the version in `version.txt`.

. Commit and push that change to Gerrit.

. Notify dev@kudu.apache.org that the new branch is available.


== Preparing A Release Candidate

. Before building a release candidate, make sure you have followed the
Apache committer guide for setting up your GPG keys
(link:https://www.apache.org/dev/new-committers-guide.html#set-up-security-and-pgp-keys[here]).

. When close to building a release candidate, try building a source tarball
(on a supported platform):
+
----
  ./build-support/build_source_release.py
----

. Fix any issues it finds, such as RAT.

. Test the full Java build. This will sign and build everything without
  deploying any artifacts:
+
----
  # Run a gpg-agent if you don't normally.
  gpg-agent --daemon
  cd java
  gradle clean install -PforceSigning
----
+

. Create a new version update commit which removes the -SNAPSHOT suffix (same
  process as above).

. In the newly created branch `branch-1.x.y` of the project git repo, update
  version-related information under the `examples` sub-directory (e.g.,
  `kudu-version` in `examples/java/java-example/pom.xml`, `version` in
  `examples/java/insert-loadgen/pom.xml`, etc.).
  The idea is making all examples use the artifacts of the newly released
  `1.x.y` version of Kudu.

. When ready, create a new lightweight tag and push it to the Apache Git repository.
+
----
  git tag 1.x.y-RC1
  git push apache 1.x.y-RC1
----

. Build a source tarball against the RC branch.

. Create a new folder containing the
  link:https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/kudu/[dev Subversion (SVN)
  repository]. Copy the artifacts to this folder and commit.
+
----
  svn co --depth=immediates https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/kudu/ kudu-dev-release
  cd kudu-dev-release
  mkdir 1.x.y-RC1
  cp <path_to_kudu>/build/apache-kudu-1.x.y.tar.* 1.x.y-RC1
  svn add 1.x.y-RC1/*
  svn commit -m "Adding Kudu 1.x.y RC1"
----

. Create a Maven staging repository for the RC.
+
----
  # Run a gpg-agent if you don't normally
  gpg-agent --daemon
  cd java
  gradle clean uploadArchives -PmavenUsername="<APACHE-LDAP-USERNAME>" -PmavenPassword="<APACHE-LDAP-PASSWORD>"
----
+
Go to the link:https://repository.apache.org/\#stagingRepositories[staging
repository] and look for ‘orgapachekudu-####’ in the staging repositories list.
You can check the ‘content’ tab at the bottom to make sure you have all of the
expected stuff (client, various integrations, etc). Hit the checkbox next to
your new staging repo and hit “close”. Enter something similar to “Apache Kudu
1.x.y-RC1” into the description box and confirm. Wait a minute or two and hit
refresh, and your staging repo should now have a URL shown in its summary tab
(eg `https://repository.apache.org/content/repositories/orgapachekudu-1005`)

. Create a new folder containing the
  link:https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/release/kudu/[release SVN
  repository]. For a release to be made official, it must eventually be put in
  this repository. Add your PGP key to the KEYS file:
+
----
svn co https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/release/kudu/ kudu-dist-release
cd kudu-dist-release
(gpg --list-sigs <your-email-address> && gpg --armor --export <your-email-address>) >> KEYS
svn commit -m "Adding my key to the KEYS file"
----

== Initiating a Vote for an RC

. Send an email to dev@kudu.apache.org to start the RC process, using
  this
  link:http://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/kudu-dev/201606.mbox/%3CCAGpTDNduoQM0ktuZc1eW1XeXCcXhvPGftJ%3DLRB8Er5c2dZptvw%40mail.gmail.com%3E[example]
  as a template.

. Reminder that voting on a release requires a
  link:https://www.apache.org/foundation/glossary.html#MajorityApproval[Majority Approval]
  by the PMC.

. Cycle through as many RCs as required.

. Always send an email with a different subject to indicate the result. For
  link:http://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/kudu-dev/201606.mbox/%3CCAGpTDNeJdU%2BoUF4ZJneZt%3DCfFHY-HoqKgORwVuWWUMHq5jBNzA%40mail.gmail.com%3E[example].

. After the vote passes, send an email to dev@kudu.apache.org indicating the
  result.

== Release

. Create a new folder in the release repository for the new release and copy
  the files from the dev repository.
+
----
  cd kudu-dist-release
  mkdir 1.x.y
  cp <path_to_kudu-dev-release>/1.x.y-RC1/* 1.x.y
  svn add 1.x.y
  svn commit -m "Adding files for Kudu 1.x.y"
----

. In the Kudu git repo, create a signed tag from the RC’s tag, and push it to the
  Apache Git repository:
+
----
  git tag -s 1.x.y -m 'Release Apache Kudu 1.x.y' 1.x.y-RC1
  git push apache 1.x.y
----

. Release the staged Java artifacts. Select the release candidate staging
  repository in link:https://repository.apache.org/#stagingRepositories[Nexus],
  and click 'Release'. You should shortly be able to see the artifacts in
  link:https://search.maven.org/search?q=g:org.apache.kudu[Maven Central].

. Release the Python artifacts. You will need to setup an account on link:https://PyPi.org[PyPi.org]
  and ask to be added to the kudu-python PyPi project if you have not done this before.
+
----
# Prepare and sign the python source distribution.
cd python
rm -rf dist/*
python setup.py sdist
gpg --detach-sign -a dist/kudu-python-1.x.y.tar.gz
# Upload the distribution to PyPi using twine.
pip install twine
twine upload dist/*
----
Note: You can upload to the test PyPi by adding
`--repository-url https://test.pypi.org/legacy/` to the twine command.

. Generate the version-specific documentation from that branch following these
  link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/#updating-the-kudu-web-site-documentation[instructions].

. Update the `index.md` file in the releases folder, add a new folder named
  after the release version, copy the `apidocs`, `cpp-client-api`, and `docs`
  folders there, copy an `index.md` file from the previous release and modify it
  accordingly. Make sure the download page meets the current
  link:https://www.apache.org/dev/release-download-pages.html[criteria]. Base
  it off the latest release which has the highest chance to comform the
  requirements, but double-check the release pages document as the criteria
  keep changing and the announcement will be rejected if our release page
  doesn't meet the criteria.

. Replace the `apidocs`, `cpp-client-api`, and `docs` symlinks in the `gh-pages`
  branch with links to the new documentation. Some of them may be actual
  directories if they had to be changed since the latest release, in this case
  remove the directory and link the new documentation instead.

. Submit these changes to the `gh-pages` Gerrit branch and get them reviewed.

. Once the review is finished and the commit is pushed, update the website following
  these link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/#deploying-changes-to-the-apache-kudu-web-site[instructions].

. About 24 hours after the first step was completed, send an email to
  user@kudu.apache.org, dev@kudu.apache.org, and announce@apache.org to
  announce the release. The email should be similar to
  link:https://s.apache.org/pduz[this].

. About another 24 hours later, clean up the SVN. If releasing a new minor
  version, delete the oldest minor version branch in the release repo (e.g. if
  `1.7.1`, `1.8.0`, and `1.9.0` exist and you just released `1.10.0`, delete
  `1.7.1`). If releasing a maintenance version, delete the previous maintenance
  branch (e.g. if you released `1.2.1`, delete `1.2.0`). Also delete any
  release candidates from the dev SVN.

. Update the version number on the branch you released from back to a SNAPSHOT
  for the next patch release, such as `1.6.1-SNAPSHOT` after the `1.6.0` release.

. In the `master` branch of the project git repo, update version-related
  information under the `examples` sub-directory to make all examples using the
  fresh artifacts of latest released version.  This should be done only after
  publishing the officially released artifacts, so they are available while
  building the examples.

Commit message:

[RELEASING.adoc] add memo on 3rd-party license policy
Added memo on the ASF 3rd-party license policy, emphasizing Category X.

Change-Id: Ie264b320e03d06b83c32f78304f4cb55854207f7
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/14615
Reviewed-by: Andrew Wong <awong@cloudera.com>
Reviewed-by: Greg Solovyev <gsolovyev@cloudera.com>
Tested-by: Alexey Serbin <aserbin@cloudera.com>

RELEASING.adoc, after:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= RELEASING KUDU

== Overview

This document gives the steps required to perform a Kudu release, and is a
resource for Kudu release managers. Make sure to read and understand the
link:http://www.apache.org/legal/release-policy.html[ASF policy on software
releases] prior to conducting the release management activity. Pay attention to
the link:https://www.apache.org/legal/resolved.html[3rd-party license policy],
making sure the release doesn't include anything from the
link:https://www.apache.org/legal/resolved.html#category-x[Category X].
To edit or update this document, edit `RELEASING.adoc` in `master`.

== Stating Intent to Release

. *A week before branching*: send an email to dev@kudu.apache.org to
  announce that the branch will be happening, including a deadline for when new
  commits will need gatekeeper approval.

. *A day before branching*: send another email to dev@kudu.apache.org
  to warn about it.

== Creating the Branch

. Create a new branch from `master`:
+
----
  git checkout master
  git pull
  git checkout -b branch-1.x.y
----

. Make a note of the SHA1 for the tip of the new branch, which is the first
  field of the result of this command:
+
----
  git log --oneline -n1
----

. Push the branch to public remotes https://github.com/cloudera/kudu.git and
  https://gitbox.apache.org/repos/asf/kudu.git. The following example assumes
  they are called `cloudera` and `apache`.
+
----
  git push cloudera branch-1.x.y
  git push apache branch-1.x.y
----

. Create a new branch on Gerrit. Go to
  http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/#/admin/projects/kudu,branches and create a
  new branch with the same name and the previously-noted SHA1.

. Ask someone with permissions to fix the gerrit.cloudera.org mirroring
  configuration. Cloudera hosts the Gerrit server and a Cloudera employee will
  have to perform this step because SSH access is behind a firewall. The steps
  are as follows:
  1. Ensure your public SSH key is in `~gerrit/.ssh/authorized_keys` on gerrit.cloudera.org
  2. From behind the firewall, `ssh gerrit@gerrit.cloudera.org` to log in.
  3. Back up the existing replication configuration file by executing
     `cp ~/etc/replication.config ~/etc/replication.config.bak.`date '+%Y%m%d.%H%M%S'``
  4. Edit `etc/replication.config` to add a line for the new branch, such as `branch-1.x.y`
  5. Send email to the dev lists for Kudu and Impala (dev@kudu.apache.org and
     dev@impala.apache.org) indicating that you are going to restart Gerrit
     (link:https://s.apache.org/2Wj7[example]). It is best to do the restart at
     some time of day when you don't expect many people to be using the system,
     since Gerrit can take a few minutes to restart.
  6. Restart Gerrit: `~/bin/gerrit.sh restart`
  7. Make sure Gerrit has been successfully restarted: after a few minutes,
     try to open the link:https://gerrit.cloudera.org/#/admin/projects[project list]
     page in your favorite browser.

. As needed, patches can be cherry-picked to the new branch.

== Updating Versions In Master

. Check out the `master` branch and bump the version in `version.txt`.

. Commit and push that change to Gerrit.

. Notify dev@kudu.apache.org that the new branch is available.


== Preparing A Release Candidate

. Before building a release candidate, make sure you have followed the
Apache committer guide for setting up your GPG keys
(link:https://www.apache.org/dev/new-committers-guide.html#set-up-security-and-pgp-keys[here]).

. When close to building a release candidate, try building a source tarball
(on a supported platform):
+
----
  ./build-support/build_source_release.py
----

. Fix any issues it finds, such as RAT.

. Test the full Java build. This will sign and build everything without
  deploying any artifacts:
+
----
  # Run a gpg-agent if you don't normally.
  gpg-agent --daemon
  cd java
  gradle clean install -PforceSigning
----
+

. Create a new version update commit which removes the -SNAPSHOT suffix (same
  process as above).

. In the newly created branch `branch-1.x.y` of the project git repo, update
  version-related information under the `examples` sub-directory (e.g.,
  `kudu-version` in `examples/java/java-example/pom.xml`, `version` in
  `examples/java/insert-loadgen/pom.xml`, etc.).
  The idea is making all examples use the artifacts of the newly released
  `1.x.y` version of Kudu.

. When ready, create a new lightweight tag and push it to the Apache Git repository.
+
----
  git tag 1.x.y-RC1
  git push apache 1.x.y-RC1
----

. Build a source tarball against the RC branch.

. Create a new folder containing the
  link:https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/kudu/[dev Subversion (SVN)
  repository]. Copy the artifacts to this folder and commit.
+
----
  svn co --depth=immediates https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/kudu/ kudu-dev-release
  cd kudu-dev-release
  mkdir 1.x.y-RC1
  cp <path_to_kudu>/build/apache-kudu-1.x.y.tar.* 1.x.y-RC1
  svn add 1.x.y-RC1/*
  svn commit -m "Adding Kudu 1.x.y RC1"
----

. Create a Maven staging repository for the RC.
+
----
  # Run a gpg-agent if you don't normally
  gpg-agent --daemon
  cd java
  gradle clean uploadArchives -PmavenUsername="<APACHE-LDAP-USERNAME>" -PmavenPassword="<APACHE-LDAP-PASSWORD>"
----
+
Go to the link:https://repository.apache.org/\#stagingRepositories[staging
repository] and look for ‘orgapachekudu-####’ in the staging repositories list.
You can check the ‘content’ tab at the bottom to make sure you have all of the
expected stuff (client, various integrations, etc). Hit the checkbox next to
your new staging repo and hit “close”. Enter something similar to “Apache Kudu
1.x.y-RC1” into the description box and confirm. Wait a minute or two and hit
refresh, and your staging repo should now have a URL shown in its summary tab
(eg `https://repository.apache.org/content/repositories/orgapachekudu-1005`)

. Create a new folder containing the
  link:https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/release/kudu/[release SVN
  repository]. For a release to be made official, it must eventually be put in
  this repository. Add your PGP key to the KEYS file:
+
----
svn co https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/release/kudu/ kudu-dist-release
cd kudu-dist-release
(gpg --list-sigs <your-email-address> && gpg --armor --export <your-email-address>) >> KEYS
svn commit -m "Adding my key to the KEYS file"
----

== Initiating a Vote for an RC

. Send an email to dev@kudu.apache.org to start the RC process, using
  this
  link:http://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/kudu-dev/201606.mbox/%3CCAGpTDNduoQM0ktuZc1eW1XeXCcXhvPGftJ%3DLRB8Er5c2dZptvw%40mail.gmail.com%3E[example]
  as a template.

. Reminder that voting on a release requires a
  link:https://www.apache.org/foundation/glossary.html#MajorityApproval[Majority Approval]
  by the PMC.

. Cycle through as many RCs as required.

. Always send an email with a different subject to indicate the result. For
  link:http://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/kudu-dev/201606.mbox/%3CCAGpTDNeJdU%2BoUF4ZJneZt%3DCfFHY-HoqKgORwVuWWUMHq5jBNzA%40mail.gmail.com%3E[example].

. After the vote passes, send an email to dev@kudu.apache.org indicating the
  result.

== Release

. Create a new folder in the release repository for the new release and copy
  the files from the dev repository.
+
----
  cd kudu-dist-release
  mkdir 1.x.y
  cp <path_to_kudu-dev-release>/1.x.y-RC1/* 1.x.y
  svn add 1.x.y
  svn commit -m "Adding files for Kudu 1.x.y"
----

. In the Kudu git repo, create a signed tag from the RC’s tag, and push it to the
  Apache Git repository:
+
----
  git tag -s 1.x.y -m 'Release Apache Kudu 1.x.y' 1.x.y-RC1
  git push apache 1.x.y
----

. Release the staged Java artifacts. Select the release candidate staging
  repository in link:https://repository.apache.org/#stagingRepositories[Nexus],
  and click 'Release'. You should shortly be able to see the artifacts in
  link:https://search.maven.org/search?q=g:org.apache.kudu[Maven Central].

. Release the Python artifacts. You will need to setup an account on link:https://PyPi.org[PyPi.org]
  and ask to be added to the kudu-python PyPi project if you have not done this before.
+
----
# Prepare and sign the python source distribution.
cd python
rm -rf dist/*
python setup.py sdist
gpg --detach-sign -a dist/kudu-python-1.x.y.tar.gz
# Upload the distribution to PyPi using twine.
pip install twine
twine upload dist/*
----
Note: You can upload to the test PyPi by adding
`--repository-url https://test.pypi.org/legacy/` to the twine command.

. Generate the version-specific documentation from that branch following these
  link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/#updating-the-kudu-web-site-documentation[instructions].

. Update the `index.md` file in the releases folder, add a new folder named
  after the release version, copy the `apidocs`, `cpp-client-api`, and `docs`
  folders there, copy an `index.md` file from the previous release and modify it
  accordingly. Make sure the download page meets the current
  link:https://www.apache.org/dev/release-download-pages.html[criteria]. Base
  it off the latest release which has the highest chance to comform the
  requirements, but double-check the release pages document as the criteria
  keep changing and the announcement will be rejected if our release page
  doesn't meet the criteria.

. Replace the `apidocs`, `cpp-client-api`, and `docs` symlinks in the `gh-pages`
  branch with links to the new documentation. Some of them may be actual
  directories if they had to be changed since the latest release, in this case
  remove the directory and link the new documentation instead.

. Submit these changes to the `gh-pages` Gerrit branch and get them reviewed.

. Once the review is finished and the commit is pushed, update the website following
  these link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/#deploying-changes-to-the-apache-kudu-web-site[instructions].

. About 24 hours after the first step was completed, send an email to
  user@kudu.apache.org, dev@kudu.apache.org, and announce@apache.org to
  announce the release. The email should be similar to
  link:https://s.apache.org/pduz[this].

. About another 24 hours later, clean up the SVN. If releasing a new minor
  version, delete the oldest minor version branch in the release repo (e.g. if
  `1.7.1`, `1.8.0`, and `1.9.0` exist and you just released `1.10.0`, delete
  `1.7.1`). If releasing a maintenance version, delete the previous maintenance
  branch (e.g. if you released `1.2.1`, delete `1.2.0`). Also delete any
  release candidates from the dev SVN.

. Update the version number on the branch you released from back to a SNAPSHOT
  for the next patch release, such as `1.6.1-SNAPSHOT` after the `1.6.0` release.

. In the `master` branch of the project git repo, update version-related
  information under the `examples` sub-directory to make all examples using the
  fresh artifacts of latest released version.  This should be done only after
  publishing the officially released artifacts, so they are available while
  building the examples.
