java/README.adoc, before:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= Kudu Java Developer Documentation

== System Requirements

- Runtime
    * Java 7+
- Build time
    * Java 8+
- Test time
    * Built Kudu Binaries
    * MIT Kerberos (krb5)

WARNING: Support for Java 7 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next major release.

== Building Everything

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew assemble
----

== Building Just the Client

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew :kudu-client:assemble
----

The client jar can then be found at `kudu-client/build/libs`.

== Running the Tests

The tests may locate the master and tablet server
binaries by looking in `build/latest/bin` from the root of
the git repository. If you have recently built the C++ code
for Kudu, those should be present already.

If for some reason the binaries aren't in the expected location
as shown above, you can pass
`-DkuduBinDir=/path/to/directory`.

Once everything is setup correctly, run:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew test
----

If you would like to force tests that were already run to re-run
you can pass `-PrerunTests`.

If you would like to run a subset of the tests or a single test
you can pass the Gradle `--tests <pattern>` argument to filter
the tests ran.
See https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_testing.html#test_filtering[here]
for detailed documentation of all pattern options.

Single Test Class Example:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew :kudu-client:test --tests org.apache.kudu.TestColumnSchema
----

Single Test Method Example:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew :kudu-client:test --tests org.apache.kudu.TestColumnSchema.testEquals
----

Pattern Example:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew test --tests *IT*
----

== Additional Gradle Commands

=== Discovering Other Gradle Tasks

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew tasks
----

=== Clearing Build State

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew clean
----

Note: You generally don't need to run this task, but it can be useful
to rule out any build issues.

=== Installing Artifacts to the Local Maven Repository

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew install
----

=== Checking for Dependency Updates

[source,bash]
----
./gradlew dependencyUpdates
----

NOTE: Additional Gradle command line flag options can be found
https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/command_line_interface.html[here].

== Tips for IDEs

=== IntelliJ

Follow the standard instructions as laid out
https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/gradle.html#gradle_import[here]
to import the Gradle project.

For the most consistent behavior on the command line and
in the IDE, be sure to enable `Delegate IDE build/run actions to gradle`
as described https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/gradle.html#delegate_build_gradle[here].

=== Eclipse

Follow the instructions as laid out
http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseGradle/article.html#eclipse-gradle-support[here]
to install the Eclipse Gradle (Buildship) tooling.
Then follow the instruction on the same page
http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseGradle/article.html#import-an-existing-gradle-project[here]
to import an existing project.

Commit message:

Update Java README Intellij test runner instructions
Change-Id: Ie372417350f50a7d4f5567cd991ac5d886329cdb
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/11700
Reviewed-by: Grant Henke <granthenke@apache.org>
Tested-by: Grant Henke <granthenke@apache.org>

java/README.adoc, after:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= Kudu Java Developer Documentation

== System Requirements

- Runtime
    * Java 7+
- Build time
    * Java 8+
- Test time
    * Built Kudu Binaries
    * MIT Kerberos (krb5)

WARNING: Support for Java 7 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next major release.

== Building Everything

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew assemble
----

== Building Just the Client

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew :kudu-client:assemble
----

The client jar can then be found at `kudu-client/build/libs`.

== Running the Tests

The tests may locate the master and tablet server
binaries by looking in `build/latest/bin` from the root of
the git repository. If you have recently built the C++ code
for Kudu, those should be present already.

If for some reason the binaries aren't in the expected location
as shown above, you can pass
`-DkuduBinDir=/path/to/directory`.

Once everything is setup correctly, run:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew test
----

If you would like to force tests that were already run to re-run
you can pass `-PrerunTests`.

If you would like to run a subset of the tests or a single test
you can pass the Gradle `--tests <pattern>` argument to filter
the tests ran.
See https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_testing.html#test_filtering[here]
for detailed documentation of all pattern options.

Single Test Class Example:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew :kudu-client:test --tests org.apache.kudu.TestColumnSchema
----

Single Test Method Example:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew :kudu-client:test --tests org.apache.kudu.TestColumnSchema.testEquals
----

Pattern Example:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew test --tests *IT*
----

== Additional Gradle Commands

=== Discovering Other Gradle Tasks

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew tasks
----

=== Clearing Build State

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew clean
----

Note: You generally don't need to run this task, but it can be useful
to rule out any build issues.

=== Installing Artifacts to the Local Maven Repository

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew install
----

=== Checking for Dependency Updates

[source,bash]
----
./gradlew dependencyUpdates
----

NOTE: Additional Gradle command line flag options can be found
https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/command_line_interface.html[here].

== Tips for IDEs

=== IntelliJ

Follow the standard instructions as laid out
https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/gradle.html#gradle_import[here]
to import the Gradle project.

For the most consistent behavior on the command line and
in the IDE, be sure to enable `Delegate IDE build/run actions to gradle`
and run tests using the `Gradle Test Runner` as described
https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/gradle.html#delegate_build_gradle[here].

=== Eclipse

Follow the instructions as laid out
http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseGradle/article.html#eclipse-gradle-support[here]
to install the Eclipse Gradle (Buildship) tooling.
Then follow the instruction on the same page
http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseGradle/article.html#import-an-existing-gradle-project[here]
to import an existing project.
