java/README.md, before:


Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Asynchronous Native Java Client for Kudu

System Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------

- Java 7 or Java 8
- Maven 3
- MIT Kerberos (krb5)

WARNING: Support for Java 7 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next major release.

Building the Client
------------------------------------------------------------

$ mvn package -DskipTests

The client jar can then be found at kudu-client/target.

Running the Tests
------------------------------------------------------------

The unit tests will start a master and a tablet
server using the flags file located in the src/test/resources/
directory. The tests will locate the master and tablet server
binaries by looking in 'build/latest/bin' from the root of
the git repository. If you have recently built the C++ code
for Kudu, those should be present already.

Once everything is setup correctly, run:

$ mvn test

If for some reason the binaries aren't in the expected location
as shown above, you can pass
-DbinDir=/path/to/directory.

Integration tests, including tests which cover Hadoop integration,
may be run with:

$ mvn verify

Building the Kudu-Spark integration for Spark 2.x with Scala 2.11
------------------------------------------------------------

The Spark integration builds for Spark 2.x and Scala 2.11 by default.
Additionally, there is a build profile available for Spark 1.x with
Scala 2.10: from the kudu-spark directory, run

$ mvn clean package -P spark_2.10

The two artifactIds are

1. kudu-spark2_2.11 for Spark 2.x with Scala 2.11
2. kudu-spark_2.10 for Spark 1.x with Scala 2.10

WARNING: Support for Spark 1 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next minor release.

State of Eclipse integration
------------------------------------------------------------

Maven projects can be integrated with Eclipse in one of two
ways:

1. Import a Maven project using Eclipse's m2e plugin.
2. Generate Eclipse project files using maven's
   maven-eclipse-plugin plugin.

Each approach has its own pros and cons.

## m2e integration (Eclipse to Maven)

The m2e approach is generally recommended as m2e is still
under active development, unlike maven-eclipse-plugin. Much
of the complexity comes from how m2e maps maven lifecycle
phases to Eclipse build actions. The problem is that m2e
must be told what to do with each maven plugin, and this
information is either conveyed through explicit mapping
metadata found in pom.xml, or in an m2e "extension". m2e
ships with extensions for some of the common maven plugins,
but not for maven-antrun-plugin or maven-protoc-plugin. The
explicit metadata mapping found in kudu-client/pom.xml has
placated m2e in both cases (in Eclipse see
kudu-client->Properties->Maven->Lifecycle Mapping).
Nevertheless, maven-protoc-plugin isn't being run correctly.

To work around this, you can download, build, and install a
user-made m2e extension for maven-protoc-plugin:

  http://www.masterzen.fr/2011/12/25/protobuf-maven-m2e-and-eclipse-are-on-a-boat

See http://wiki.eclipse.org/M2E_plugin_execution_not_covered
for far more excruciating detail.

## maven-eclipse-plugin (Maven to Eclipse)

The maven-eclipse-plugin approach, despite being old
fashioned and largely unsupported, is easier to use. The
very first time you want to use it, run the following:

$ mvn -Declipse.workspace=<path-to-eclipse-workspace> eclipse:configure-workspace

This will add the M2_REPO classpath variable to Eclipse. You
can verify this in
Preferences->Java->Build Path->Classpath Variables. It
should be set to `/home/<user>/.m2/repository`.

To generate the Eclipse project files, run:

$ mvn eclipse:eclipse

If you want to look at Javadoc/source in Eclipse for
dependent artifacts, run:

$ mvn eclipse:eclipse -DdownloadJavadocs=true -DdownloadSources=true

So what's the problem with maven-eclipse-plugin? The issue
lies with maven-protoc-plugin. Because all of our .proto
files are in src/kudu, the "resource path" in
maven-protoc-plugin must be absolute and prefixed with
${project.baseDir). This absolute path is copied verbatim
to an Eclipse .classpath <classpathentry/>, and Eclipse
doesn't know what to do with it, causing it avoid building
kudu-client altogether. Other plugins (like
maven-avro-plugin) don't seem to have this problem, so it's
likely a bug in maven-protoc-plugin.

There's a simple workaround: delete the errant folder within
Eclipse and refresh the kudu-client project.

Building with Gradle
--------------------

As an experiment a Gradle build definition also exists.
In order to run the Gradle build you must install [Gradle|https://gradle.org/].
If you would rather not install Gradle locally, you can use the
[Gradle Wrapper|https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/gradle_wrapper.html]
by replacing all references to gradle with gradlew.

## Running a full build

This will build all modules and run all "checks".

$ gradle buildAll

## Building the Client
$ gradle :kudu-client:assemble

The client jar can then be found at kudu-client/build/libs.

## Running the Tests
$ gradle test

Integration tests, including tests which cover Hadoop integration,
may be run with:

$ gradle integrationTest

*Note:* Integration tests may depend on built Kudu binaries.

## Building the Kudu-Spark integration

Builds with Spark 2.x with Scala 2.11 (the default) or
Spark 1.x with Scala 2.10.

$ gradle :kudu-spark:assemble
$ gradle :kudu-spark:assemble -PscalaVersions=2.10.6

## Installing to local maven repo

$ gradle install

## Clearing cached build state

$ gradle clean

## Discovering other tasks

$ gradle tasks

Commit message:

KUDU-2104. Upgrade to Spark 2.2.0
Upgrades to Spark 2.2.0 and documents the Java 8
runtime requirement.

Also adjusts the Jenkins scripts to use Java 8 when
building and running.

Change-Id: If3c179816f02fa8cc3e942e803851881dda0a014
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/7720
Tested-by: Kudu Jenkins
Reviewed-by: Dan Burkert <danburkert@apache.org>

java/README.md, after:


Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Asynchronous Native Java Client for Kudu

System Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------

- Java 7 or Java 8
- Maven 3
- MIT Kerberos (krb5)

WARNING: Support for Java 7 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next major release.

Building the Client
------------------------------------------------------------

$ mvn package -DskipTests

The client jar can then be found at kudu-client/target.

Running the Tests
------------------------------------------------------------

The unit tests will start a master and a tablet
server using the flags file located in the src/test/resources/
directory. The tests will locate the master and tablet server
binaries by looking in 'build/latest/bin' from the root of
the git repository. If you have recently built the C++ code
for Kudu, those should be present already.

Once everything is setup correctly, run:

$ mvn test

If for some reason the binaries aren't in the expected location
as shown above, you can pass
-DbinDir=/path/to/directory.

Integration tests, including tests which cover Hadoop integration,
may be run with:

$ mvn verify

Building the Kudu-Spark integration for Spark 2.x with Scala 2.11
------------------------------------------------------------

The Spark integration builds for Spark 2.x and Scala 2.11 by default.
Additionally, there is a build profile available for Spark 1.x with
Scala 2.10: from the kudu-spark directory, run

$ mvn clean package -P spark_2.10

The two artifactIds are

1. kudu-spark2_2.11 for Spark 2.x with Scala 2.11
2. kudu-spark_2.10 for Spark 1.x with Scala 2.10

WARNING: Support for Spark 1 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next minor release.

WARNING: Spark 2.2+ requires Java 8 at runtime even though Kudu Spark 2.x integration
is Java 7 compatible. Spark 2.2 is the default dependency version as of Kudu 1.5.0.

State of Eclipse integration
------------------------------------------------------------

Maven projects can be integrated with Eclipse in one of two
ways:

1. Import a Maven project using Eclipse's m2e plugin.
2. Generate Eclipse project files using maven's
   maven-eclipse-plugin plugin.

Each approach has its own pros and cons.

## m2e integration (Eclipse to Maven)

The m2e approach is generally recommended as m2e is still
under active development, unlike maven-eclipse-plugin. Much
of the complexity comes from how m2e maps maven lifecycle
phases to Eclipse build actions. The problem is that m2e
must be told what to do with each maven plugin, and this
information is either conveyed through explicit mapping
metadata found in pom.xml, or in an m2e "extension". m2e
ships with extensions for some of the common maven plugins,
but not for maven-antrun-plugin or maven-protoc-plugin. The
explicit metadata mapping found in kudu-client/pom.xml has
placated m2e in both cases (in Eclipse see
kudu-client->Properties->Maven->Lifecycle Mapping).
Nevertheless, maven-protoc-plugin isn't being run correctly.

To work around this, you can download, build, and install a
user-made m2e extension for maven-protoc-plugin:

  http://www.masterzen.fr/2011/12/25/protobuf-maven-m2e-and-eclipse-are-on-a-boat

See http://wiki.eclipse.org/M2E_plugin_execution_not_covered
for far more excruciating detail.

## maven-eclipse-plugin (Maven to Eclipse)

The maven-eclipse-plugin approach, despite being old
fashioned and largely unsupported, is easier to use. The
very first time you want to use it, run the following:

$ mvn -Declipse.workspace=<path-to-eclipse-workspace> eclipse:configure-workspace

This will add the M2_REPO classpath variable to Eclipse. You
can verify this in
Preferences->Java->Build Path->Classpath Variables. It
should be set to `/home/<user>/.m2/repository`.

To generate the Eclipse project files, run:

$ mvn eclipse:eclipse

If you want to look at Javadoc/source in Eclipse for
dependent artifacts, run:

$ mvn eclipse:eclipse -DdownloadJavadocs=true -DdownloadSources=true

So what's the problem with maven-eclipse-plugin? The issue
lies with maven-protoc-plugin. Because all of our .proto
files are in src/kudu, the "resource path" in
maven-protoc-plugin must be absolute and prefixed with
${project.baseDir). This absolute path is copied verbatim
to an Eclipse .classpath <classpathentry/>, and Eclipse
doesn't know what to do with it, causing it avoid building
kudu-client altogether. Other plugins (like
maven-avro-plugin) don't seem to have this problem, so it's
likely a bug in maven-protoc-plugin.

There's a simple workaround: delete the errant folder within
Eclipse and refresh the kudu-client project.

Building with Gradle
--------------------

As an experiment a Gradle build definition also exists.
In order to run the Gradle build you must install [Gradle|https://gradle.org/].
If you would rather not install Gradle locally, you can use the
[Gradle Wrapper|https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/gradle_wrapper.html]
by replacing all references to gradle with gradlew.

## Running a full build

This will build all modules and run all "checks".

$ gradle buildAll

## Building the Client
$ gradle :kudu-client:assemble

The client jar can then be found at kudu-client/build/libs.

## Running the Tests
$ gradle test

Integration tests, including tests which cover Hadoop integration,
may be run with:

$ gradle integrationTest

*Note:* Integration tests may depend on built Kudu binaries.

## Building the Kudu-Spark integration

Builds with Spark 2.x with Scala 2.11 (the default) or
Spark 1.x with Scala 2.10.

$ gradle :kudu-spark:assemble
$ gradle :kudu-spark:assemble -PscalaVersions=2.10.6

## Installing to local maven repo

$ gradle install

## Clearing cached build state

$ gradle clean

## Discovering other tasks

$ gradle tasks
