examples/quickstart/impala/README.adoc, before:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= Apache Impala Quickstart

Below is a brief example using Apache Impala to insert, update, delete, and query data in Apache Kudu.

== Start the Kudu Quickstart Environment

See the Apache Kudu
link:https://kudu.apache.org/docs/quickstart.html[quickstart documentation]
to setup and run the Kudu quickstart environment.

== Run Apache Impala

Use the following command to run the latest Apache Impala docker image:

NOTE: This docker image is a single node Kudu only image published for use in this quickstart only.
The image is running a Hive metastore backed by a Derby database along with an Impala statestore daemon,
catalog daemon, and executor daemon. The docker run command below will expose the required RPC and HTTP ports.

[source,bash]
----
docker run -d --name kudu-impala --network="docker_default" \
  -p 21000:21000 -p 21050:21050 -p 25000:25000 -p 25010:25010 -p 25020:25020 \
  --memory=4096m apache/kudu:impala-latest impala
----

You can view the running Impala instance at link:http://localhost:25000[localhost:25000]
once it is up and running. It may take a few seconds to start.

NOTE: `--network="docker_default"` is specified to connect the container the
same network as the quickstart cluster.

NOTE: You can remove the `-d` flag to run the container in the foreground.


== Run the impala-shell

Use the command below to enter the `impala-shell` in the `kudu-impala` container:

[source,bash]
----
docker exec -it kudu-impala impala-shell
----

NOTE: If the `impala-shell` says "Could not connect", wait a few more seconds to give
Impala time to start and then enter `connect;` in the shell to try again.

== Create a Kudu Table

Now that you are in an `impala-shell` that is connected to Impala you can use an
link:https://impala.apache.org/docs/build/html/topics/impala_ddl.html[Impala DDL statement]
to create a Kudu table.

[source,bash]
----
CREATE TABLE my_first_table
(
  id BIGINT,
  name STRING,
  PRIMARY KEY(id)
)
PARTITION BY HASH PARTITIONS 4
STORED AS KUDU;

DESCRIBE my_first_table;
----

== Insert and Modify Data

With `my_first_table` created you can now use
link:https://impala.apache.org/docs/build/html/topics/impala_dml.html[Impala DML statements]
to `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `UPSERT`, and `DELETE` data.

[source,bash]
----
-- Insert a row.
INSERT INTO my_first_table VALUES (99, "sarah");
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Insert multiple rows.
INSERT INTO my_first_table VALUES (1, "john"), (2, "jane"), (3, "jim");
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Update a row.
UPDATE my_first_table SET name="bob" where id = 3;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Use upsert to insert a new row and update another.
UPSERT INTO my_first_table VALUES (3, "bobby"), (4, "grant");
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Delete a row.
DELETE FROM my_first_table WHERE id = 99;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Delete multiple rows.
DELETE FROM my_first_table WHERE id < 3;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;
----

== Create an External Table

Sometimes users want to create an Impala table that points to an existing Kudu table.
This can be achieved by using an
link:https://impala.apache.org/docs/build/html/topics/impala_tables.html#external_tables[external table] in Impala.
This will create an Impala table entry that points to the existing underlying Kudu table.

[source,bash]
----
CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE my_second_table
STORED AS KUDU
TBLPROPERTIES('kudu.table_name' = 'impala::default.my_first_table');

DESCRIBE my_second_table;

DESCRIBE EXTENDED my_second_table;
----

== Drop the Tables

You can drop the tables with a simple Impala DROP TABLE statement.
When dropping the external table the underlying Kudu table will still exist.
But when dropping the managed table the underling Kudu data will also be dropped.

[source,bash]
----
DROP TABLE my_second_table;

DESCRIBE my_first_table;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

DROP TABLE my_first_table;
----

== Exit the impala-shell

Use the statement below to get exit the `impala-shell` in the `kudu-impala` container:

[source,bash]
----
exit;
----

== Shutdown Impala

Once you are done with the Impala container you can shutdown in a couple of ways.
If you ran Impala without the `-d` flag, you can use `ctrl + c` to stop the  container.

If you ran Impala with the `-d` flag, you can use the following to
gracefully shutdown the container:

[source,bash]
----
docker stop kudu-impala
----

To permanently remove the container run the following:

[source,bash]
----
docker rm kudu-impala
----

== Next steps

The above example illustrates the basics of interacting with Kudu tables in Apache Impala.
Next explore the other quickstart guides to learn how to ingest the data using other tools.

For example, the link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/tree/master/examples/quickstart/spark[Spark quickstart guide]
and link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/tree/master/examples/quickstart/nifi[NiFi quickstart guide]
will walk you through how to ingest and process data in Kudu. You can follow those quickstart guides
and query the data ingested using the steps described in this quickstart.

If you have already run through the Spark quickstart the following is an
example of the code to allow you to query the `sfmta_kudu` table:

[source,bash]
----
CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE sfmta_kudu
STORED AS KUDU
TBLPROPERTIES('kudu.table_name' = 'sfmta_kudu');

SELECT * FROM sfmta_kudu
ORDER BY speed
LIMIT 5;
----

If you have already run through the NiFi quickstart the following is an
example of the code to allow you to query the `random_user` table:

[source,bash]
----
CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE random_user
STORED AS KUDU
TBLPROPERTIES('kudu.table_name' = 'random_user');

SELECT count(*) FROM random_user;

SELECT * FROM random_user LIMIT 5;
----

== Help

If have questions, issues, or feedback on this quickstart guide, please reach out to the
link:https://kudu.apache.org/community.html[Apache Kudu community].

Commit message:

[docker] Clarify how to run Impala in standalone

examples/quickstart/impala/README.adoc, after:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= Apache Impala Quickstart

Below is a brief example using Apache Impala to insert, update, delete, and query data in Apache Kudu.

== Start the Kudu Quickstart Environment

See the Apache Kudu
link:https://kudu.apache.org/docs/quickstart.html[quickstart documentation]
to setup and run the Kudu quickstart environment.

== Run Apache Impala

Use the following command to run the latest Apache Impala docker image:

NOTE: This docker image is a single node Kudu only image published for use in this quickstart only.
The image is running a Hive metastore backed by a Derby database along with an Impala statestore daemon,
catalog daemon, and executor daemon. The docker run command below will expose the required RPC and HTTP ports.

[source,bash]
----
docker run -d --name kudu-impala --network="docker_default" \
  -p 21000:21000 -p 21050:21050 -p 25000:25000 -p 25010:25010 -p 25020:25020 \
  --memory=4096m apache/kudu:impala-latest impala
----

You can view the running Impala instance at link:http://localhost:25000[localhost:25000]
once it is up and running. It may take a few seconds to start.

NOTE: `--network="docker_default"` is optional and used for enabling Impala to connect to the
same network as the Kudu quickstart cluster hence allowing the use of Kudu tables.

NOTE: You can remove the `-d` flag to run the container in the foreground.


== Run the impala-shell

Use the command below to enter the `impala-shell` in the `kudu-impala` container:

[source,bash]
----
docker exec -it kudu-impala impala-shell
----

NOTE: If the `impala-shell` says "Could not connect", wait a few more seconds to give
Impala time to start and then enter `connect;` in the shell to try again.

== Create a Kudu Table

Now that you are in an `impala-shell` that is connected to Impala you can use an
link:https://impala.apache.org/docs/build/html/topics/impala_ddl.html[Impala DDL statement]
to create a Kudu table.

[source,bash]
----
CREATE TABLE my_first_table
(
  id BIGINT,
  name STRING,
  PRIMARY KEY(id)
)
PARTITION BY HASH PARTITIONS 4
STORED AS KUDU;

DESCRIBE my_first_table;
----

== Insert and Modify Data

With `my_first_table` created you can now use
link:https://impala.apache.org/docs/build/html/topics/impala_dml.html[Impala DML statements]
to `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `UPSERT`, and `DELETE` data.

[source,bash]
----
-- Insert a row.
INSERT INTO my_first_table VALUES (99, "sarah");
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Insert multiple rows.
INSERT INTO my_first_table VALUES (1, "john"), (2, "jane"), (3, "jim");
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Update a row.
UPDATE my_first_table SET name="bob" where id = 3;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Use upsert to insert a new row and update another.
UPSERT INTO my_first_table VALUES (3, "bobby"), (4, "grant");
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Delete a row.
DELETE FROM my_first_table WHERE id = 99;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

-- Delete multiple rows.
DELETE FROM my_first_table WHERE id < 3;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;
----

== Create an External Table

Sometimes users want to create an Impala table that points to an existing Kudu table.
This can be achieved by using an
link:https://impala.apache.org/docs/build/html/topics/impala_tables.html#external_tables[external table] in Impala.
This will create an Impala table entry that points to the existing underlying Kudu table.

[source,bash]
----
CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE my_second_table
STORED AS KUDU
TBLPROPERTIES('kudu.table_name' = 'impala::default.my_first_table');

DESCRIBE my_second_table;

DESCRIBE EXTENDED my_second_table;
----

== Drop the Tables

You can drop the tables with a simple Impala DROP TABLE statement.
When dropping the external table the underlying Kudu table will still exist.
But when dropping the managed table the underling Kudu data will also be dropped.

[source,bash]
----
DROP TABLE my_second_table;

DESCRIBE my_first_table;
SELECT * FROM my_first_table;

DROP TABLE my_first_table;
----

== Exit the impala-shell

Use the statement below to get exit the `impala-shell` in the `kudu-impala` container:

[source,bash]
----
exit;
----

== Shutdown Impala

Once you are done with the Impala container you can shutdown in a couple of ways.
If you ran Impala without the `-d` flag, you can use `ctrl + c` to stop the  container.

If you ran Impala with the `-d` flag, you can use the following to
gracefully shutdown the container:

[source,bash]
----
docker stop kudu-impala
----

To permanently remove the container run the following:

[source,bash]
----
docker rm kudu-impala
----

== Next steps

The above example illustrates the basics of interacting with Kudu tables in Apache Impala.
Next explore the other quickstart guides to learn how to ingest the data using other tools.

For example, the link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/tree/master/examples/quickstart/spark[Spark quickstart guide]
and link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/tree/master/examples/quickstart/nifi[NiFi quickstart guide]
will walk you through how to ingest and process data in Kudu. You can follow those quickstart guides
and query the data ingested using the steps described in this quickstart.

If you have already run through the Spark quickstart the following is an
example of the code to allow you to query the `sfmta_kudu` table:

[source,bash]
----
CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE sfmta_kudu
STORED AS KUDU
TBLPROPERTIES('kudu.table_name' = 'sfmta_kudu');

SELECT * FROM sfmta_kudu
ORDER BY speed
LIMIT 5;
----

If you have already run through the NiFi quickstart the following is an
example of the code to allow you to query the `random_user` table:

[source,bash]
----
CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE random_user
STORED AS KUDU
TBLPROPERTIES('kudu.table_name' = 'random_user');

SELECT count(*) FROM random_user;

SELECT * FROM random_user LIMIT 5;
----

== Help

If have questions, issues, or feedback on this quickstart guide, please reach out to the
link:https://kudu.apache.org/community.html[Apache Kudu community].
