kubernetes/helm/README.adoc, before:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= Building Kubernetes Kudu Cluster Using Helm Chart

NOTE: All of this work is experimental and subject to change or removal.

== Getting Started

Helm — The package manager for Kubernetes. Helps to define, install, and upgrade Kubernetes applications

NOTE: Read more about Helm here https://helm.sh/docs/using_helm/#quickstart

==== System Requirements

    kubectl
    minikube or kubeadm
    docker
    helm

==== Build Kudu Docker Image

    ../../docker/docker-build.sh

==== Creating Namespace

    kubectl create -f ../namespace.yaml

==== Creating ServiceAccount And Role Binding (RBAC)

    kubectl create -f kudu-rbac.yaml

==== Initializing Helm Tiller

    helm init --service-account kudu-helm --tiller-namespace apache-kudu --upgrade --wait

Check if tiller is initialized and you should not see any authorization errors.

    helm ls --namespace apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu

==== Helm Launch Kudu cluster

    helm install kudu --namespace apache-kudu --name apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu --wait

    helm install kudu -f kudu-expose-all.yaml --namespace apache-kudu --name apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu --wait

You should see below output on stdout

```
NAME:   apache-kudu
LAST DEPLOYED: Fri Jun  7 12:03:47 2019
NAMESPACE: apache-kudu
STATUS: DEPLOYED

RESOURCES:
==> v1/Pod(related)
NAME            READY  STATUS   RESTARTS  AGE
kudu-master-0   1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-master-1   1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-master-2   1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-tserver-0  1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-tserver-1  1/1    Running  0         12s

==> v1/Service
NAME                  TYPE       CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP  PORT(S)                        AGE
kudu-master-service   NodePort   10.100.28.117  <none>       8051:31198/TCP,8050:31182/TCP  12s
kudu-masters          ClusterIP  None           <none>       8051/TCP,8050/TCP              12s
kudu-tserver-service  NodePort   10.103.171.31  <none>       7051:30967/TCP,7050:32543/TCP  12s
kudu-tservers         ClusterIP  None           <none>       7051/TCP,7050/TCP              12s

==> v1/StatefulSet
NAME          READY  AGE
kudu-master   3/3    12s
kudu-tserver  2/2    12s

==> v1beta1/PodDisruptionBudget
NAME              MIN AVAILABLE  MAX UNAVAILABLE  ALLOWED DISRUPTIONS  AGE
kudu-tserver-pdb  N/A            1                1                    12s
```

==== Port Forward The Kudu Master UI

    kubectl port-forward kudu-master-0 8051 -n apache-kudu
    OR
    minikube service kudu-master-service --url -n apache-kudu

==== Destroy The Kudu Cluster

    helm del --purge apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu

==== Display Kudu Master Logs:

    kubectl logs kudu-master-0 --namespace apache-kudu

==== Running Helm Test for Kudu HealthCheck

    helm test apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu

Commit message:

[k8s] Improve helm chart testing
Adds documentation for helm chart testing and linting.

Change-Id: I0b9c2a8f4042cf603b7d1aa54cc21bde9b59c975
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/13641
Reviewed-by: Grant Henke <granthenke@apache.org>
Tested-by: Grant Henke <granthenke@apache.org>

kubernetes/helm/README.adoc, after:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

= Building Kubernetes Kudu Cluster Using Helm Chart

NOTE: All of this work is experimental and subject to change or removal.

== Getting Started

Helm — The package manager for Kubernetes. Helps to define, install, and upgrade Kubernetes applications

NOTE: Read more about Helm here https://helm.sh/docs/using_helm/#quickstart

==== System Requirements

    kubectl
    minikube or kubeadm
    docker
    helm

==== Build Kudu Docker Image

    ../../docker/docker-build.sh

==== Creating Namespace

    kubectl create -f ../namespace.yaml

==== Creating ServiceAccount And Role Binding (RBAC)

    kubectl create -f kudu-rbac.yaml

==== Initializing Helm Tiller

    helm init --service-account kudu-helm --tiller-namespace apache-kudu --upgrade --wait

Check if tiller is initialized and you should not see any authorization errors.

    helm ls --namespace apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu

==== Helm Launch Kudu cluster

    helm install kudu --namespace apache-kudu --name apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu --wait

    helm install kudu -f kudu-expose-all.yaml --namespace apache-kudu --name apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu --wait

You should see below output on stdout

```
NAME:   apache-kudu
LAST DEPLOYED: Fri Jun  7 12:03:47 2019
NAMESPACE: apache-kudu
STATUS: DEPLOYED

RESOURCES:
==> v1/Pod(related)
NAME            READY  STATUS   RESTARTS  AGE
kudu-master-0   1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-master-1   1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-master-2   1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-tserver-0  1/1    Running  0         12s
kudu-tserver-1  1/1    Running  0         12s

==> v1/Service
NAME                  TYPE       CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP  PORT(S)                        AGE
kudu-master-service   NodePort   10.100.28.117  <none>       8051:31198/TCP,8050:31182/TCP  12s
kudu-masters          ClusterIP  None           <none>       8051/TCP,8050/TCP              12s
kudu-tserver-service  NodePort   10.103.171.31  <none>       7051:30967/TCP,7050:32543/TCP  12s
kudu-tservers         ClusterIP  None           <none>       7051/TCP,7050/TCP              12s

==> v1/StatefulSet
NAME          READY  AGE
kudu-master   3/3    12s
kudu-tserver  2/2    12s

==> v1beta1/PodDisruptionBudget
NAME              MIN AVAILABLE  MAX UNAVAILABLE  ALLOWED DISRUPTIONS  AGE
kudu-tserver-pdb  N/A            1                1                    12s
```

==== Port Forward The Kudu Master UI

    kubectl port-forward kudu-master-0 8051 -n apache-kudu
    OR
    minikube service kudu-master-service --url -n apache-kudu

==== Destroy The Kudu Cluster

    helm del --purge apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu

==== Display Kudu Master Logs:

    kubectl logs kudu-master-0 --namespace apache-kudu

=== Testing Helm Charts

    # helm-template : it will render chart templates locally and display the output.
    helm template kudu

    # To render just one template in a chart
    helm template kudu -x templates/kudu-service.yaml

    # helm lint: examines a chart for possible issues, useful to validate chart dependencies.
    helm lint kudu --namespace apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu

    # The argument this command takes is the name of a deployed release.
    # The tests to be run are defined in the chart that was installed.
    helm test apache-kudu --tiller-namespace apache-kudu
