docs/design-docs/master.md, before:

<!---
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

============================================================
The Catalog Manager and System Tables
============================================================

The Catalog Manager keeps track of the Kudu tables and tablets defined by the
user in the cluster.

All the table and tablet information is stored in-memory in copy-on-write
TableInfo / TabletInfo objects, as well as on-disk, in the "sys.catalog"
Kudu system table hosted only on the Masters.  This system table is loaded
into memory on Master startup.  At the time of this writing, the "sys.catalog"
table consists of only a single tablet in order to provide strong consistency
for the metadata under RAFT replication (as currently, each tablet has its own
log).

To add or modify a table or tablet, the Master writes, but does not yet commit
the changes to memory, then writes and flushes the system table to disk, and
then makes the changes visible in-memory (commits them) if the disk write (and,
in a distributed master setup, config-based replication) is successful. This
allows readers to access the in-memory state in a consistent
way, even while a write is in-progress.

This design prevents having to go through the whole scan path to service tablet
location calls, which would be more expensive, and allows for easily keeping
"soft" state in the Master for every Table and Tablet.

The catalog manager maintains 3 hash-maps for looking up info in the sys table:
- [Table Id] -> TableInfo
- [Table Name] -> TableInfo
- [Tablet Id] -> TabletInfo

The TableInfo has a map [tablet-start-key] -> TabletInfo used to provide
the tablets locations to the user based on a key-range request.


Table Creation
--------------

The below corresponds to the code in CatalogManager::CreateTable().

1. Client -> Master request: Create "table X" with N tablets and schema S.
2. Master: CatalogManager::CreateTable():
   a. Validate user request (e.g. ensure a valid schema).
   b. Verify that the table name is not already taken.
      TODO: What about old, deleted tables?
   c. Add (in-memory) the new TableInfo (in "preparing" state).
   d. Add (in-memory) the TabletInfo based on the user-provided pre-split-keys
      field (in "preparing" state).
   e. Write the tablets info to "sys.catalog"
      (The Master process is killed if the write fails).
      - Master begins writing to disk.
      - Note: If the Master crashes or restarts here or at any time previous to
        this point, the table will not exist when the Master comes back online.
   f. Write the table info to "sys.catalog" with the "running" state
      (The Master process is killed if the write fails).
      - Master completes writing to disk.
      - After this point, the table will exist and be re-created as necessary
        at startup time after a crash or process restart.
   g. Commit the "running" state to memory, which allows clients to see the table.
3. Master -> Client response: The table has been created with some ID, i.e. "xyz"
   (or, in case something went wrong, an error message).

After this point in time, the table is reported as created, which means that if
the cluster is shut down, when it starts back up the table will still exist.
However, the tablets are not yet created (see Table Assignment, below).


Table Deletion
--------------

When the user sends a DeleteTable request for table T, table T is marked as
deleted by writing a "deleted" flag in the state field in T's record in the
"sys.catalog" table, table T is removed from the in-memory "table names"
map on the Master, and the table is marked as being "deleted" in the
in-memory TableInfo / TabletInfo "state" field on the Master.
TODO: Could this race with table deletion / creation??

At this point, the table is no longer externally visible to clients via Master
RPC calls, but the tablet configs that make up the table may still be up and
running. New clients trying to open the table will get a NotFound error, while
clients that already have the tablet locations cached may still be able to
read and write to the tablet configs, as long as the corresponding tablet
servers are online and their respective tablets have not yet been deleted.
In some ways, this is similar the design of FS unlink.

The Master will asynchronously send a DeleteTablet RPC request to each tablet
(one RPC request per tablet server in the config, for each tablet), and the
tablets will therefore be deleted in parallel in some unspecified order. If the
Master or tablet server goes offline before a particular DeleteTablet operation
successfully completes, the Master will send a new DeleteTablet request at the
time that the next heartbeat is received from the tablet that is to be deleted.

A "Cleaner" process will be reponsible for removing the data from deleted tables
and tablets in the future, both on-disk and cached in memory (TODO).


Table Assignment (Tablet Creation)
----------------------------------

Once a table is created, the tablets must be created on a set of replicas. In
order to do that, the master has to select the replicas and associate them to
the tablet.

For each tablet not created we select a set of replicas and a leader and we
send the "create tablet" request. On the next TS-heartbeat from the leader we
can mark the tablet as "running", if reported. If we don't receive a "tablet
created" report after ASSIGNMENT-TIMEOUT-MSEC we replace the tablet with a new
one, following these same steps for the new tablet.

The Assignment is processed by the "CatalogManagerBgTasks" thread. This thread
is waiting for an event that can be:

- Create Table (need to process the new tablet for assignment)
- Assignment Timeout (some tablet request timeout expired, replace it)

This is the current control flow:

- CatalogManagerBgTasks thread:
  1. Process Pending Assignments:
     - For each tablet pending assignment:
       - If tablet creation was already requested:
          - If we did not receive a response yet, and the configurable
            assignment timeout period has passed, mark the tablet as "replaced":
            1. Delete the tablet if it ever reports in.
            2. Create a new tablet in its place, add that tablet to the
               "create table" list.
       - Else, if the tablet is new (just created by CreateTable in "preparing" state):
         - Add it to the "create tablet" list.
     - Now, for each tablet in the "create tablet" list:
       - Select a set of tablet servers to host the tablet config.
       - Select a tablet server to be the initial config leader.
       [BEGIN-WRITE-TO-DISK]
       - Flush the "to create" to sys.catalog with state "creating"
       [If something fails here, the "Process Pending Assignments" will
        reprocess these tablets. As nothing was done, running tables will be replaced]
       [END-WRITE-TO-DISK]
       - For each tablet server in the config:
         - Send an async CreateTablet() RPC request to the TS.
           On TS-heartbeat, the Master will receive the notification of "tablet creation".
     - Commit any changes in state to memory.
       At this point the tablets marked as "running" are visible to the user.

  2. Cleanup deleted tables & tablets (FIXME: is this implemented?):
     - Remove the tables/tablets with "deleted" state from "sys.catalog"
     - Remove the tablets with "deleted" state from the in-memory map
     - Remove the tables with "deleted" state from the in-memory map

When the TS receives a CreateTablet() RPC, it will attempt to create the tablet
replica locally. Once it is successful, it will be added to the next tablet
report. When the tablet is reported, the master-side ProcessTabletReport()
function is called.

If we find at this point that the reported tablet is in "creating" state, and
the TS reporting the tablet is the leader selected during the assignment
process (see CatalogManagerBgTasksThread above), the tablet will be marked as
running and committed to disk, completing the assignment process.


Alter Table
-----------

When the user sends an alter request, which may contain changes to the schema,
table name or attributes, the Master will send a set of AlterTable() RPCs to
each TS handling the set of tablets currently running. The Master will keep
retrying in case of error.

If a TS is down or goes down during an AlterTable request, on restart it will
report the schema version that it is using, and if it is out of date, the Master
will send an AlterTable request to that TS at that time.

When the Master first comes online after being restarted, a full tablet report
will be requested from each TS, and the tablet schema version sent on the next
heartbeat will be used to determine if a given TS needs an AlterTable() call.

============================================================
Heartbeats and TSManager
============================================================

Heartbeats are sent by the TS to the master. Per master.proto, a
heartbeat contains:

1. Node instance information: permanent uuid, node sequence number
(which is incremented each time the node is started).

2. (Optional) registration. Sent either at TS startup or if the master
responded to a previous heartbeat with "needs register" (see
'Handling heartbeats' below for an explanation of when this response
will be sent).

3. (Optional) tablet report. Sent either when tablet information has
changed, or if the master responded to a previous heartbeat with
"needs a full tablet report" (see "Handling heartbeats" below for an
explanation of when this response will be sent).

Handling heartbeats
-------------------

Upon receiving a heartbeat from a TS, the master will:

1) Check if the heartbeat has registration info. If so, register
the TS instance with TSManager (see "TSManager" below for more
details).

2) Retrieve a TSDescriptor from TSManager. If the TSDescriptor
is not found, reply to the TS with "need re-register" field set to
true, and return early.

3) Update the heartbeat time (see "TSManager" below) in the
registration object.

4) If the heartbeat contains a tablet report, the Catalog Manager will
process the report and update its cache as well as the system tables
(see "Catalog Manager" above). Otherwise, the master will respond to
the TS requesting a full tablet report.

5) Send a success respond to the TS.

TSManager
---------

TSManager provides in-memory storage for information sent by the
tablet server to the master (tablet servers that have been heard from,
heartbeats, tablet reports, etc...). The information is stored in a
map, where the key is the permanent uuid of a tablet server and the
value is (a pointer to) a TSDescriptor.

Commit message:

[docs] added info on TSK an CA entries in systable
Change-Id: I3c75d792981c3152f5844a2ea6934c0ce0032522
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/6111
Reviewed-by: Adar Dembo <adar@cloudera.com>
Tested-by: Alexey Serbin <aserbin@cloudera.com>

docs/design-docs/master.md, after:

<!---
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

============================================================
The Catalog Manager and System Tables
============================================================

The Catalog Manager keeps track of the Kudu tables and tablets defined by the
user in the cluster.

All the table and tablet information is stored in-memory in copy-on-write
TableInfo / TabletInfo objects, as well as on-disk, in the "sys.catalog"
Kudu system table hosted only on the Masters.  This system table is loaded
into memory on Master startup.  At the time of this writing, the "sys.catalog"
table consists of only a single tablet in order to provide strong consistency
for the metadata under RAFT replication (as currently, each tablet has its own
log).

To add or modify a table or tablet, the Master writes, but does not yet commit
the changes to memory, then writes and flushes the system table to disk, and
then makes the changes visible in-memory (commits them) if the disk write (and,
in a distributed master setup, config-based replication) is successful. This
allows readers to access the in-memory state in a consistent
way, even while a write is in-progress.

This design prevents having to go through the whole scan path to service tablet
location calls, which would be more expensive, and allows for easily keeping
"soft" state in the Master for every Table and Tablet.

The catalog manager maintains 3 hash-maps for looking up info in the sys table:
- [Table Id] -> TableInfo
- [Table Name] -> TableInfo
- [Tablet Id] -> TabletInfo

The TableInfo has a map [tablet-start-key] -> TabletInfo used to provide
the tablets locations to the user based on a key-range request.


Table Creation
--------------

The below corresponds to the code in CatalogManager::CreateTable().

1. Client -> Master request: Create "table X" with N tablets and schema S.
2. Master: CatalogManager::CreateTable():
   a. Validate user request (e.g. ensure a valid schema).
   b. Verify that the table name is not already taken.
      TODO: What about old, deleted tables?
   c. Add (in-memory) the new TableInfo (in "preparing" state).
   d. Add (in-memory) the TabletInfo based on the user-provided pre-split-keys
      field (in "preparing" state).
   e. Write the tablets info to "sys.catalog"
      (The Master process is killed if the write fails).
      - Master begins writing to disk.
      - Note: If the Master crashes or restarts here or at any time previous to
        this point, the table will not exist when the Master comes back online.
   f. Write the table info to "sys.catalog" with the "running" state
      (The Master process is killed if the write fails).
      - Master completes writing to disk.
      - After this point, the table will exist and be re-created as necessary
        at startup time after a crash or process restart.
   g. Commit the "running" state to memory, which allows clients to see the table.
3. Master -> Client response: The table has been created with some ID, i.e. "xyz"
   (or, in case something went wrong, an error message).

After this point in time, the table is reported as created, which means that if
the cluster is shut down, when it starts back up the table will still exist.
However, the tablets are not yet created (see Table Assignment, below).


Table Deletion
--------------

When the user sends a DeleteTable request for table T, table T is marked as
deleted by writing a "deleted" flag in the state field in T's record in the
"sys.catalog" table, table T is removed from the in-memory "table names"
map on the Master, and the table is marked as being "deleted" in the
in-memory TableInfo / TabletInfo "state" field on the Master.
TODO: Could this race with table deletion / creation??

At this point, the table is no longer externally visible to clients via Master
RPC calls, but the tablet configs that make up the table may still be up and
running. New clients trying to open the table will get a NotFound error, while
clients that already have the tablet locations cached may still be able to
read and write to the tablet configs, as long as the corresponding tablet
servers are online and their respective tablets have not yet been deleted.
In some ways, this is similar the design of FS unlink.

The Master will asynchronously send a DeleteTablet RPC request to each tablet
(one RPC request per tablet server in the config, for each tablet), and the
tablets will therefore be deleted in parallel in some unspecified order. If the
Master or tablet server goes offline before a particular DeleteTablet operation
successfully completes, the Master will send a new DeleteTablet request at the
time that the next heartbeat is received from the tablet that is to be deleted.


Table Assignment (Tablet Creation)
----------------------------------

Once a table is created, the tablets must be created on a set of replicas. In
order to do that, the master has to select the replicas and associate them to
the tablet.

For each tablet not created we select a set of replicas and a leader and we
send the "create tablet" request. On the next TS-heartbeat from the leader we
can mark the tablet as "running", if reported. If we don't receive a "tablet
created" report after ASSIGNMENT-TIMEOUT-MSEC we replace the tablet with a new
one, following these same steps for the new tablet.

The Assignment is processed by the "CatalogManagerBgTasks" thread. This thread
is waiting for an event that can be:

- Create Table (need to process the new tablet for assignment)
- Assignment Timeout (some tablet request timeout expired, replace it)

This is the current control flow:

- CatalogManagerBgTasks thread:
  1. Process Pending Assignments:
     - For each tablet pending assignment:
       - If tablet creation was already requested:
          - If we did not receive a response yet, and the configurable
            assignment timeout period has passed, mark the tablet as "replaced":
            1. Delete the tablet if it ever reports in.
            2. Create a new tablet in its place, add that tablet to the
               "create table" list.
       - Else, if the tablet is new (just created by CreateTable in "preparing" state):
         - Add it to the "create tablet" list.
     - Now, for each tablet in the "create tablet" list:
       - Select a set of tablet servers to host the tablet config.
       - Select a tablet server to be the initial config leader.
       [BEGIN-WRITE-TO-DISK]
       - Flush the "to create" to sys.catalog with state "creating"
       [If something fails here, the "Process Pending Assignments" will
        reprocess these tablets. As nothing was done, running tables will be replaced]
       [END-WRITE-TO-DISK]
       - For each tablet server in the config:
         - Send an async CreateTablet() RPC request to the TS.
           On TS-heartbeat, the Master will receive the notification of "tablet creation".
     - Commit any changes in state to memory.
       At this point the tablets marked as "running" are visible to the user.

  2. Cleanup deleted tables & tablets (FIXME: is this implemented?):
     - Remove the tables/tablets with "deleted" state from "sys.catalog"
     - Remove the tablets with "deleted" state from the in-memory map
     - Remove the tables with "deleted" state from the in-memory map

When the TS receives a CreateTablet() RPC, it will attempt to create the tablet
replica locally. Once it is successful, it will be added to the next tablet
report. When the tablet is reported, the master-side ProcessTabletReport()
function is called.

If we find at this point that the reported tablet is in "creating" state, and
the TS reporting the tablet is the leader selected during the assignment
process (see CatalogManagerBgTasksThread above), the tablet will be marked as
running and committed to disk, completing the assignment process.


Alter Table
-----------

When the user sends an alter request, which may contain changes to the schema,
table name or attributes, the Master will send a set of AlterTable() RPCs to
each TS handling the set of tablets currently running. The Master will keep
retrying in case of error.

If a TS is down or goes down during an AlterTable request, on restart it will
report the schema version that it is using, and if it is out of date, the Master
will send an AlterTable request to that TS at that time.

When the Master first comes online after being restarted, a full tablet report
will be requested from each TS, and the tablet schema version sent on the next
heartbeat will be used to determine if a given TS needs an AlterTable() call.

============================================================
Heartbeats and TSManager
============================================================

Heartbeats are sent by the TS to the master. Per master.proto, a
heartbeat contains:

1. Node instance information: permanent uuid, node sequence number
(which is incremented each time the node is started).

2. (Optional) registration. Sent either at TS startup or if the master
responded to a previous heartbeat with "needs register" (see
'Handling heartbeats' below for an explanation of when this response
will be sent).

3. (Optional) tablet report. Sent either when tablet information has
changed, or if the master responded to a previous heartbeat with
"needs a full tablet report" (see "Handling heartbeats" below for an
explanation of when this response will be sent).

Handling heartbeats
-------------------

Upon receiving a heartbeat from a TS, the master will:

1) Check if the heartbeat has registration info. If so, register
the TS instance with TSManager (see "TSManager" below for more
details).

2) Retrieve a TSDescriptor from TSManager. If the TSDescriptor
is not found, reply to the TS with "need re-register" field set to
true, and return early.

3) Update the heartbeat time (see "TSManager" below) in the
registration object.

4) If the heartbeat contains a tablet report, the Catalog Manager will
process the report and update its cache as well as the system tables
(see "Catalog Manager" above). Otherwise, the master will respond to
the TS requesting a full tablet report.

5) Send a success respond to the TS.

TSManager
---------

TSManager provides in-memory storage for information sent by the
tablet server to the master (tablet servers that have been heard from,
heartbeats, tablet reports, etc...). The information is stored in a
map, where the key is the permanent uuid of a tablet server and the
value is (a pointer to) a TSDescriptor.

IPKI: Internal Root Certificate Authority (CA) Information
----------------------------------------------------------

Besides tables' metadata, the system table contains the root CA certificate
and corresponding private key when Kudu is configured to use its own IPKI
(Internal Private Key Infrastructure). The root CA certificate and the private
key are used to
  1. Sign TLS certificates for Kudu server-side components like Master and
     Tablet Servers.
  2. Authenticate the server side of TLS connection: the initiator of a
     TLS connection (the client side) uses Kudu CA certificate to make sure
     the peer has valid TLS certificate signed by the Kudu internal CA.

Upon start of a Kudu master server, it generates and stores the root CA
certificate and corresponding private key when becoming leader if no such
information is present in the system table. If the internal root CA information
is already present in the system table, the leader master loads that
information into memory and uses it appropriately.

IPKI: TSK (Token Signing Keys)
------------------------------

The system table contains entries with TSKs used for authn/authz token signing.
The leader master generates and stores those in the system table. Upon start-up
or on the change of master leadership, a new leader master loads existing TSK
entries from the system table and populates in-memory structures necessary
for token signing. Expired keys are lazily purged from the system table
by the leader master.
