docs/developing.adoc, before:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

[[developing]]
= Developing Applications With Apache Kudu

:author: Kudu Team
:imagesdir: ./images
:icons: font
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:doctype: book
:backend: html5
:sectlinks:
:experimental:

Kudu provides C++, Java and Python client APIs, as well as reference examples to illustrate
their use.

WARNING: Use of server-side or private interfaces is not supported, and interfaces
which are not part of public APIs have no stability guarantees.

== Viewing the API Documentation
include::installation.adoc[tags=view_api]

== Working Examples

Several example applications are provided in the
link:https://github.com/cloudera/kudu-examples[kudu-examples] Github
repository. Each example includes a `README` that shows how to compile and run
it. These examples illustrate correct usage of the Kudu APIs, as well as how to
set up a virtual machine to run Kudu. The following list includes some of the
examples that are available today. Check the repository itself in case this list goes
out of date.

`java/java-example`::
  A simple Java application which connects to a Kudu instance, creates a table, writes data to it, then drops the table.
`java/collectl`::
  A small Java application which listens on a TCP socket for time series data corresponding to the Collectl wire protocol.
  The commonly-available collectl tool can be used to send example data to the server.
`java/insert-loadgen`::
  A Java application that generates random insert load.
`python/dstat-kudu`::
  An example program that shows how to use the Kudu Python API to load data into a new / existing Kudu table
  generated by an external program, `dstat` in this case.
`python/graphite-kudu`::
  An experimental plugin for using graphite-web with Kudu as a backend.
`demo-vm-setup`::
  Scripts to download and run a VirtualBox virtual machine with Kudu already installed.
  See link:quickstart.html[Quickstart] for more information.

These examples should serve as helpful starting points for your own Kudu applications and integrations.

=== Maven Artifacts
The following Maven `<dependency>` element is valid for the Kudu public beta:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.kudu</groupId>
  <artifactId>kudu-client</artifactId>
  <version>0.5.0</version>
</dependency>
----

Because the Maven artifacts are not in Maven Central, use the following `<repository>`
element:

[source,xml]
----
<repository>
  <id>cdh.repo</id>
  <name>Cloudera Repositories</name>
  <url>https://repository.cloudera.com/artifactory/cloudera-repos</url>
  <snapshots>
    <enabled>false</enabled>
  </snapshots>
</repository>
----

See subdirectories of https://github.com/cloudera/kudu-examples/tree/master/java for
example Maven pom.xml files.

== Example Impala Commands With Kudu

See link:kudu_impala_integration.html[Using Impala With Kudu] for guidance on installing
and using Impala with Kudu, including several `impala-shell` examples.

== Kudu Integration with Spark

Kudu integrates with Spark through the Data Source API as of version 0.9.
Include the kudu-spark jar using the --jars option:
[source]
----
spark-shell --jars kudu-spark-0.9.0.jar
----
then import kudu-spark and create a dataframe:
[source,scala]
----
import org.apache.kudu.spark.kudu._

// Read a table from Kudu
val df = sqlContext.read.options(Map("kudu.master" -> "kudu.master:7051","kudu.table" -> "kudu_table")).kudu

// Query using the Spark API...
df.select("id").filter("id" >= 5).show()

// ...or register a temporary table and use SQL
df.registerTempTable("kudu_table")
val filteredDF = sqlContext.sql("select id from kudu_table where id >= 5").show()

// Use KuduContext to create, delete, or write to Kudu tables
val kuduContext = new KuduContext("kudu.master:7051")

// Create a new Kudu table from a dataframe schema
// NB: No rows from the dataframe are inserted into the table
kuduContext.createTable("test_table", df.schema, Seq("key"), new CreateTableOptions().setNumReplicas(1))

// Insert data
kuduContext.insertRows(df, "test_table")

// Delete data
kuduContext.deleteRows(filteredDF, "test_table")

// Upsert data
kuduContext.upsertRows(df, "test_table")

// Update data
val alteredDF = df.select("id", $"count" + 1)
kuduContext.updateRows(filteredRows, "test_table"

// Data can also be inserted into the Kudu table using the data source, though the methods on KuduContext are preferred
// NB: The default is to upsert rows; to perform standard inserts instead, set operation = insert in the options map
// NB: Only mode Append is supported
df.write.options(Map("kudu.master"-> "kudu.master:7051", "kudu.table"-> "test_table")).mode("append").kudu

// Check for the existence of a Kudu table
kuduContext.tableExists("another_table")

// Delete a Kudu table
kuduContext.deleteTable("unwanted_table")
----

=== Spark Integration Known Issues and Limitations

- The Kudu Spark integration is tested and developed against Spark 1.6 and Scala
  2.10.
- Kudu tables with a name containing upper case or non-ascii characters must be
  assigned an alternate name when registered as a temporary table.
- Kudu tables with a column name containing upper case or non-ascii characters
  may not be used with SparkSQL. Non-primary key columns may be renamed in Kudu
  to work around this issue.
- `NULL`, `NOT NULL`, `<>`, `OR`, `LIKE`, and `IN` predicates are not pushed to
  Kudu, and instead will be evaluated by the Spark task.
- Kudu does not support all types supported by Spark SQL, such as `Date`,
  `Decimal` and complex types.


== Kudu Python Client
The Kudu Python client provides a Python friendly interface to the C++ client API.
The sample below demonstrates the use of part of the Python client.
[source,python]
----
import kudu
from kudu.client import Partitioning
from datetime import datetime

# Connect to Kudu master server
client = kudu.connect(host='kudu.master', port=7051)

# Define a schema for a new table
builder = kudu.schema_builder()
builder.add_column('key').type(kudu.int64).nullable(False).primary_key()
builder.add_column('ts_val', type_=kudu.unixtime_micros, nullable=False, compression='lz4')
schema = builder.build()

# Define partitioning schema
partitioning = Partitioning().add_hash_partitions(column_names=['key'], num_buckets=3)

# Create new table
client.create_table('python-example', schema, partitioning)

# Open a table
table = client.table('python-example')

# Create a new session so that we can apply write operations
session = client.new_session()

# Insert a row
op = table.new_insert({'key': 1, 'ts_val': datetime.utcnow()})
session.apply(op)

# Upsert a row
op = table.new_upsert({'key': 2, 'ts_val': "2016-01-01T00:00:00.000000"})
session.apply(op)

# Updating a row
op = table.new_update({'key': 1, 'ts_val': ("2017-01-01", "%Y-%m-%d")})
session.apply(op)

# Delete a row
op = table.new_delete({'key': 2})
session.apply(op)

# Flush write operations, if failures occur, capture print them.
try:
    session.flush()
except kudu.KuduBadStatus as e:
    print(session.get_pending_errors())

# Create a scanner and add a predicate
scanner = table.scanner()
scanner.add_predicate(table['ts_val'] == datetime(2017, 1, 1))

# Open Scanner and read all tuples
# Note: This doesn't scale for large scans
result = scanner.open().read_all_tuples()
----

== Integration with MapReduce, YARN, and Other Frameworks

Kudu was designed to integrate with MapReduce, YARN, Spark, and other frameworks in
the Hadoop ecosystem. See
link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/blob/master/java/kudu-client-tools/src/main/java/org/apache/kudu/mapreduce/tools/RowCounter.java[RowCounter.java]
and
link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/blob/master/java/kudu-client-tools/src/main/java/org/apache/kudu/mapreduce/tools/ImportCsv.java[ImportCsv.java]
for examples which you can model your own integrations on. Stay tuned for more examples
using YARN and Spark in the future.

Commit message:

KUDU-1655. Update docs for ASF maven repository coordinates
- Update Maven Artifacts
- Update Kudu Integration with Spark using --packages

Change-Id: I4ddafd84dbf2a977e8b7faea78d3b38968c4e19e
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/5581
Tested-by: Kudu Jenkins
Reviewed-by: Todd Lipcon <todd@apache.org>

docs/developing.adoc, after:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

[[developing]]
= Developing Applications With Apache Kudu

:author: Kudu Team
:imagesdir: ./images
:icons: font
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:doctype: book
:backend: html5
:sectlinks:
:experimental:

Kudu provides C++, Java and Python client APIs, as well as reference examples to illustrate
their use.

WARNING: Use of server-side or private interfaces is not supported, and interfaces
which are not part of public APIs have no stability guarantees.

== Viewing the API Documentation
include::installation.adoc[tags=view_api]

== Working Examples

Several example applications are provided in the
link:https://github.com/cloudera/kudu-examples[kudu-examples] Github
repository. Each example includes a `README` that shows how to compile and run
it. These examples illustrate correct usage of the Kudu APIs, as well as how to
set up a virtual machine to run Kudu. The following list includes some of the
examples that are available today. Check the repository itself in case this list goes
out of date.

`java/java-example`::
  A simple Java application which connects to a Kudu instance, creates a table, writes data to it, then drops the table.
`java/collectl`::
  A small Java application which listens on a TCP socket for time series data corresponding to the Collectl wire protocol.
  The commonly-available collectl tool can be used to send example data to the server.
`java/insert-loadgen`::
  A Java application that generates random insert load.
`python/dstat-kudu`::
  An example program that shows how to use the Kudu Python API to load data into a new / existing Kudu table
  generated by an external program, `dstat` in this case.
`python/graphite-kudu`::
  An experimental plugin for using graphite-web with Kudu as a backend.
`demo-vm-setup`::
  Scripts to download and run a VirtualBox virtual machine with Kudu already installed.
  See link:quickstart.html[Quickstart] for more information.

These examples should serve as helpful starting points for your own Kudu applications and integrations.

=== Maven Artifacts
The following Maven `<dependency>` element is valid for the Apache Kudu public release
(since 1.0.0):

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.kudu</groupId>
  <artifactId>kudu-client</artifactId>
  <version>1.1.0</version>
</dependency>
----

Convenience binary artifacts for the Java client and various Java integrations (e.g. Spark, Flume)
are also now available via the link:http://repository.apache.org[ASF Maven repository] and
link:https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.apache.kudu[Maven Central repository].

== Example Impala Commands With Kudu

See link:kudu_impala_integration.html[Using Impala With Kudu] for guidance on installing
and using Impala with Kudu, including several `impala-shell` examples.

== Kudu Integration with Spark

Kudu integrates with Spark through the Data Source API as of version 1.0.0.
Include the kudu-spark dependency using the --packages option:

Use the kudu-spark_2.10 artifact if using Spark with Scala 2.10
[source]
----
spark-shell --packages org.apache.kudu:kudu-spark_2.10:1.1.0
----

Use kudu-spark2_2.11 artifact if using Spark 2 with Scala 2.11
[source]
----
spark-shell --packages org.apache.kudu:kudu-spark2_2.11:1.1.0
----

then import kudu-spark and create a dataframe:
[source,scala]
----
import org.apache.kudu.spark.kudu._

// Read a table from Kudu
val df = sqlContext.read.options(Map("kudu.master" -> "kudu.master:7051","kudu.table" -> "kudu_table")).kudu

// Query using the Spark API...
df.select("id").filter("id" >= 5).show()

// ...or register a temporary table and use SQL
df.registerTempTable("kudu_table")
val filteredDF = sqlContext.sql("select id from kudu_table where id >= 5").show()

// Use KuduContext to create, delete, or write to Kudu tables
val kuduContext = new KuduContext("kudu.master:7051")

// Create a new Kudu table from a dataframe schema
// NB: No rows from the dataframe are inserted into the table
kuduContext.createTable("test_table", df.schema, Seq("key"), new CreateTableOptions().setNumReplicas(1))

// Insert data
kuduContext.insertRows(df, "test_table")

// Delete data
kuduContext.deleteRows(filteredDF, "test_table")

// Upsert data
kuduContext.upsertRows(df, "test_table")

// Update data
val alteredDF = df.select("id", $"count" + 1)
kuduContext.updateRows(filteredRows, "test_table"

// Data can also be inserted into the Kudu table using the data source, though the methods on KuduContext are preferred
// NB: The default is to upsert rows; to perform standard inserts instead, set operation = insert in the options map
// NB: Only mode Append is supported
df.write.options(Map("kudu.master"-> "kudu.master:7051", "kudu.table"-> "test_table")).mode("append").kudu

// Check for the existence of a Kudu table
kuduContext.tableExists("another_table")

// Delete a Kudu table
kuduContext.deleteTable("unwanted_table")
----

=== Spark Integration Known Issues and Limitations

- The Kudu Spark integration is tested and developed against Spark 1.6 and Scala
  2.10.
- Kudu tables with a name containing upper case or non-ascii characters must be
  assigned an alternate name when registered as a temporary table.
- Kudu tables with a column name containing upper case or non-ascii characters
  may not be used with SparkSQL. Non-primary key columns may be renamed in Kudu
  to work around this issue.
- `NULL`, `NOT NULL`, `<>`, `OR`, `LIKE`, and `IN` predicates are not pushed to
  Kudu, and instead will be evaluated by the Spark task.
- Kudu does not support all types supported by Spark SQL, such as `Date`,
  `Decimal` and complex types.


== Kudu Python Client
The Kudu Python client provides a Python friendly interface to the C++ client API.
The sample below demonstrates the use of part of the Python client.
[source,python]
----
import kudu
from kudu.client import Partitioning
from datetime import datetime

# Connect to Kudu master server
client = kudu.connect(host='kudu.master', port=7051)

# Define a schema for a new table
builder = kudu.schema_builder()
builder.add_column('key').type(kudu.int64).nullable(False).primary_key()
builder.add_column('ts_val', type_=kudu.unixtime_micros, nullable=False, compression='lz4')
schema = builder.build()

# Define partitioning schema
partitioning = Partitioning().add_hash_partitions(column_names=['key'], num_buckets=3)

# Create new table
client.create_table('python-example', schema, partitioning)

# Open a table
table = client.table('python-example')

# Create a new session so that we can apply write operations
session = client.new_session()

# Insert a row
op = table.new_insert({'key': 1, 'ts_val': datetime.utcnow()})
session.apply(op)

# Upsert a row
op = table.new_upsert({'key': 2, 'ts_val': "2016-01-01T00:00:00.000000"})
session.apply(op)

# Updating a row
op = table.new_update({'key': 1, 'ts_val': ("2017-01-01", "%Y-%m-%d")})
session.apply(op)

# Delete a row
op = table.new_delete({'key': 2})
session.apply(op)

# Flush write operations, if failures occur, capture print them.
try:
    session.flush()
except kudu.KuduBadStatus as e:
    print(session.get_pending_errors())

# Create a scanner and add a predicate
scanner = table.scanner()
scanner.add_predicate(table['ts_val'] == datetime(2017, 1, 1))

# Open Scanner and read all tuples
# Note: This doesn't scale for large scans
result = scanner.open().read_all_tuples()
----

== Integration with MapReduce, YARN, and Other Frameworks

Kudu was designed to integrate with MapReduce, YARN, Spark, and other frameworks in
the Hadoop ecosystem. See
link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/blob/master/java/kudu-client-tools/src/main/java/org/apache/kudu/mapreduce/tools/RowCounter.java[RowCounter.java]
and
link:https://github.com/apache/kudu/blob/master/java/kudu-client-tools/src/main/java/org/apache/kudu/mapreduce/tools/ImportCsv.java[ImportCsv.java]
for examples which you can model your own integrations on. Stay tuned for more examples
using YARN and Spark in the future.
