docs/installation.adoc, before:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

[[installation]]
= Installing Apache Kudu

:author: Kudu Team
:imagesdir: ./images
:icons: font
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:doctype: book
:backend: html5
:sectlinks:
:experimental:

The Apache Kudu project only publishes source code releases, to deploy Kudu on a
cluster follow the steps below to build Kudu from source.

== Prerequisites and Requirements
.Hardware
- One or more hosts to run Kudu masters. It is recommended to have either one master (no fault
tolerance), or three masters (can tolerate one failure). The number of masters must be odd.
- One or more hosts to run Kudu tablet servers. When using replication, a minimum of three tablet
servers is necessary.

WARNING: A deployment with an even number of masters provides the same level of fault tolerance as a
deployment with one fewer master. For example, both four-master and three-master deployments can
only tolerate a single failure; two-master deployments cannot tolerate any failures.

.Operating System Requirements
Linux::
    - RHEL 6, RHEL 7, CentOS 6, CentOS 7, Ubuntu 14.04 (Trusty), Ubuntu 16.04 (Xenial), Debian 8 (Jessie), or SLES 12.
    - A kernel and filesystem that support _hole punching_. Hole punching is the use of the
      `fallocate(2)` system call with the `FALLOC_FL_PUNCH_HOLE` option set. See
      link:troubleshooting.html#req_hole_punching[troubleshooting hole punching] for more
      information.
    - ntp.
    - xfs or ext4 formatted drives.
macOS::
    - OS X 10.10 Yosemite, OS X 10.11 El Capitan, macOS Sierra, or macOS High Sierra.
Windows::
    - Microsoft Windows is unsupported.

.Storage
- If solid state storage is available, storing Kudu WALs on such high-performance
media may significantly improve latency when Kudu is configured for its highest
durability levels.

.Java
- JDK 7 or JDK 8 is required to build Kudu, but a JRE is not required at runtime
  except for tests.

[[build_from_source]]
== Build From Source

Below are the steps for each supported operating system to build Kudu from  source.

[WARNING]
.Known Build Issues
====
* It is not possible to build Kudu on Microsoft Windows.
* A C++11 capable compiler (GCC 4.8+) is required.
====

[[rhel_from_source]]
=== RHEL or CentOS
RHEL or CentOS 6.6 or later is required to build Kudu from source. To build
on a version older than 7.0, the Red Hat Developer Toolset must be installed
(in order to have access to a C++11 capable compiler).

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ sudo yum install autoconf automake cyrus-sasl-devel cyrus-sasl-gssapi \
  cyrus-sasl-plain flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1.8.0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-server krb5-workstation libtool make openssl-devel patch \
  pkgconfig redhat-lsb-core rsync unzip vim-common which
----

. If building on RHEL or CentOS older than 7.0, install the Red Hat Developer
Toolset.
+
----
$ DTLS_RPM=rhscl-devtoolset-3-epel-6-x86_64-1-2.noarch.rpm
$ DTLS_RPM_URL=https://www.softwarecollections.org/repos/rhscl/devtoolset-3/epel-6-x86_64/noarch/${DTLS_RPM}
$ wget ${DTLS_RPM_URL} -O ${DTLS_RPM}
$ sudo yum install -y scl-utils ${DTLS_RPM}
$ sudo yum install -y devtoolset-3-toolchain
----

. Optional: Install some additional packages, including ruby, if you plan to build documentation.
+
----
$ sudo yum install doxygen gem graphviz ruby-devel zlib-devel
----
NOTE: If building on RHEL or CentOS older than 7.0, the gem package may need to be replaced with rubygems

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script. Not using
the devtoolset will result in `Host compiler appears to require libatomic, but cannot find it.`
+
[source,bash]
----
$ build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

. Build Kudu, using the utilities installed in the previous step. Choose a build
directory for the intermediate output, which can be anywhere in your filesystem
except for the `kudu` directory itself. Notice that the devtoolset must still be specified,
else you'll get `cc1plus: error: unrecognized command line option "-std=c++11"`.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh \
  ../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----

. Optional: Install Kudu client libraries and headers.
If you do not specify an installation directory through the `DESTDIR`
environment variable, `/usr/local/` is the default.
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo make DESTDIR=/opt/kudu install
----
NOTE: 'make install' does not copy Kudu binaries. You need to manually copy them
as below:
* Copy the `kudu-tserver`, `kudu-master`, and `kudu` binaries from within the `bin`
subdirectory of your Kudu build directory.
* We typically recommend putting `kudu` in the bin directory (e.g. `/usr/bin`)
and the server binaries in the sbin directory (e.g. `/usr/sbin`).
* However, if you use the default installation directory without specifying the
`DESTDIR` environment variable, `make install` will install files into `/usr/local`,
so you should copy the Kudu binaries to `/usr/local/bin` and `/usr/local/sbin`
respectively.
. Optional: Build the documentation. NOTE: This command builds local documentation that
is not appropriate for uploading to the Kudu website.
+
----
$ make docs
----

.RHEL / CentOS Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on a
newly-installed RHEL or CentOS host, and can be used as the basis for an
automated deployment scenario. It skips the steps marked *Optional* above.

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

sudo yum -y install autoconf automake cyrus-sasl-devel cyrus-sasl-gssapi \
  cyrus-sasl-plain flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1.8.0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-server krb5-workstation libtool make openssl-devel patch pkgconfig \
  redhat-lsb-core rsync unzip vim-common which
DTLS_RPM=rhscl-devtoolset-3-epel-6-x86_64-1-2.noarch.rpm
DTLS_RPM_URL=https://www.softwarecollections.org/repos/rhscl/devtoolset-3/epel-6-x86_64/noarch/${DTLS_RPM}
wget ${DTLS_RPM_URL} -O ${DTLS_RPM}
sudo yum install -y scl-utils ${DTLS_RPM}
sudo yum install -y devtoolset-3-toolchain
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh \
  ../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[ubuntu_from_source]]
=== Ubuntu or Debian

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ sudo apt-get install autoconf automake curl flex g++ gcc gdb git \
  krb5-admin-server krb5-kdc krb5-user libkrb5-dev libsasl2-dev libsasl2-modules \
  libsasl2-modules-gssapi-mit libssl-dev libtool lsb-release make ntp \
  openjdk-8-jdk openssl patch pkg-config python rsync unzip vim-common
----

. Optional: Install some additional packages, including ruby, if you plan to build documentation.
+
----
$ sudo apt-get install doxygen gem graphviz ruby-dev xsltproc zlib1g-dev
----

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

. Build Kudu, using the utilities installed in the previous step. Choose a build
directory for the intermediate output, which can be anywhere in your filesystem
except for the `kudu` directory itself.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release ../..
make -j4
----

. Optional: Install Kudu client libraries and headers.
If you do not specify an installation directory through the `DESTDIR`
environment variable, `/usr/local/` is the default.
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo make DESTDIR=/opt/kudu install
----
NOTE: 'make install' does not copy Kudu binaries. You need to manually copy them
as below:
* Copy the `kudu-tserver`, `kudu-master`, and `kudu` binaries from within the `bin`
subdirectory of your Kudu build directory.
* We typically recommend putting `kudu` in the bin directory (e.g. `/usr/bin`)
and the server binaries in the sbin directory (e.g. `/usr/sbin`).
* However, if you use the default installation directory without specifying the
`DESTDIR` environment variable, `make install` will install files into `/usr/local`,
so you should copy the Kudu binaries to `/usr/local/bin` and `/usr/local/sbin`
respectively.

. Optional: Build the documentation. NOTE: This command builds local documentation that
is not appropriate for uploading to the Kudu website.
+
----
$ make docs
----

.Ubuntu / Debian Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on Ubuntu, and
can be used as the basis for an automated deployment scenario. It skips
the steps marked *Optional* above.

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

sudo apt-get -y install autoconf automake curl flex g++ gcc gdb git \
  krb5-admin-server krb5-kdc krb5-user libkrb5-dev libsasl2-dev libsasl2-modules \
  libsasl2-modules-gssapi-mit libssl-dev libtool lsb-release make ntp \
  openjdk-8-jdk openssl patch pkg-config python rsync unzip vim-common
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[sles_from_source]]
=== SUSE Linux Enterprise Server

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ sudo zypper install autoconf automake curl cyrus-sasl-devel \
  cyrus-sasl-gssapi flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1_8_0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-devel krb5-server libtool lsb-release make ntp openssl-devel patch \
  pkg-config python rsync unzip vim
----

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

. Build Kudu, using the utilities installed in the previous step. Choose a build
directory for the intermediate output, which can be anywhere in your filesystem
except for the `kudu` directory itself.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----

. Optional: Install Kudu client libraries and headers.
If you do not specify an installation directory through the `DESTDIR`
environment variable, `/usr/local/` is the default.
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo make DESTDIR=/opt/kudu install
----
NOTE: 'make install' does not copy Kudu binaries. You need to manually copy them
as below:
* Copy the `kudu-tserver`, `kudu-master`, and `kudu` binaries from within the `bin`
subdirectory of your Kudu build directory.
* We typically recommend putting `kudu` in the bin directory (e.g. `/usr/bin`)
and the server binaries in the sbin directory (e.g. `/usr/sbin`).
* However, if you use the default installation directory without specifying the
`DESTDIR` environment variable, `make install` will install files into `/usr/local`,
so you should copy the Kudu binaries to `/usr/local/bin` and `/usr/local/sbin`
respectively.

.SLES Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on SLES, and
can be used as the basis for an automated deployment scenario. It skips
the steps marked *Optional* above.

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

sudo zypper install -y autoconf automake curl cyrus-sasl-devel \
  cyrus-sasl-gssapi flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1_8_0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-devel libtool lsb-release make ntp openssl-devel patch \
  pkg-config python rsync unzip vim
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[osx_from_source]]
=== macOS
The link:https://developer.apple.com/xcode/[Xcode] package is necessary for
compiling Kudu. Some of the instructions below use link:http://brew.sh/[Homebrew]
to install dependencies, but manual dependency installation is possible.

After installing Xcode, don't forget to accept the license and install command-line
tools, if it's not done yet:
----
$ sudo xcodebuild -license
$ sudo xcode-select --install
----

[WARNING]
.macOS Known Issues
====
Kudu support for macOS is experimental, and should only be used for development.
See link:https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/KUDU-1219[macOS Limitations & Known Issues]
for more information.
====

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ brew install autoconf automake cmake git krb5 libtool openssl pkg-config pstree
----

. Optional: Install some additional packages, including ruby, if you plan to build documentation.
+
----
$ brew install doxygen graphviz ruby
$ brew install gnu-sed --with-default-names #The macOS default sed handles the -i parameter differently
----

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----
  - If different versions of the dependencies are installed and used when calling
`thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh`, you may get stuck with output similar to the
following:
+
----
./configure: line 16299: error near unexpected token `newline'
./configure: line 16299: `  PKG_CHECK_MODULES('
----
+
The thirdparty builds may be cached and may reflect the incorrect versions of the
dependencies. Ensure that you have the correct dependencies listed in Step 1, clean
the workspace, and then try to re-build.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clean -fdx
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

  - Some combinations of Homebrew installations and system upgrades can result with a
different kind of error:
+
----
libtool: Version mismatch error.  This is libtool 2.4.6, but the
libtool: definition of this LT_INIT comes from libtool 2.4.2.
libtool: You should recreate aclocal.m4 with macros from libtool 2.4.6
libtool: and run autoconf again.
----
+
As described in this link:https://github.com/Homebrew/legacy-homebrew/issues/43874[thread],
a possible fix is to uninstall and reinstall libtool:
+
[source,bash]
----
$ brew uninstall libtool && brew install libtool
----

. Build Kudu. Choose a build directory for the intermediate output, which can be
anywhere in your filesystem except for the `kudu` directory itself.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  -DOPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/opt/openssl \
  ../..
make -j4
----

.macOS Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on macOS, and can
be used as the basis for an automated deployment scenario. It assumes Xcode and Homebrew
are installed.

----
#!/bin/bash

brew tap homebrew/dupes
brew install autoconf automake cmake git krb5 libtool openssl pkg-config pstree
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  -DOPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/opt/openssl \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[build_cpp_client]]
== Installing the C++ Client Libraries

See the Kudu client install section at the bottom of <<build_from_source>> above.

WARNING: Only build against the client libraries and headers (`kudu_client.so` and `client.h`).
Other libraries and headers are internal to Kudu and have no stability guarantees.

[[build_java_client]]
== Build the Java Client

.Requirements
- JDK 7 or JDK 8

WARNING: Support for Java 7 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next major release.

To build the Java client, clone the Kudu Git
repository, change to the `java` directory, and issue the following command:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew assemble
----

For more information about building the Java API, as well as Eclipse integration,
see `java/README.md`.

[[view_api]]
== View API Documentation

// tag::view_api[]
.C++ API Documentation
You can view the link:../cpp-client-api/index.html[C++ client API
documentation] online. Alternatively, after
link:installation.html#build_from_source[building Kudu from source], you can
additionally build the `doxygen` target (e.g., run `make doxygen` if using
make) and use the locally generated API documentation by opening
`docs/doxygen/client_api/html/index.html` file in your favorite Web browser.

NOTE: In order to build the `doxygen` target, it's necessary to have
doxygen with Dot (graphviz) support installed at your build machine. If
you installed doxygen after building Kudu from source, you will need to run
`cmake` again to pick up the doxygen location and generate appropriate
targets.

.Java API Documentation
You can view the link:../apidocs/index.html[Java API documentation] online.
Alternatively, after link:installation.html#build_java_client[building the Java
client], Java API documentation is available in
`java/kudu-client/target/apidocs/index.html`.
// end::view_api[]

[[upgrade]]
== Upgrade from a Previous Version of Kudu

Before upgrading, you should read the link:release_notes.html[Release Notes] for
the version of Kudu that you are about to install. Pay close attention to the
incompatibilities, upgrade, and downgrade notes that are documented there.

NOTE: Currently rolling upgrades are not supported. Please shut down all Kudu services before
  upgrading the software.

[[next_steps]]
== Next Steps
- link:configuration.html[Configuring Kudu]
- link:administration.html[Kudu Administration]

Commit message:

[docs] KUDU-2395 Add nscd to requirements
Change-Id: Iad4db28297c08739b048dc46e398f7ddca80df48
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/13084
Reviewed-by: Adar Dembo <adar@cloudera.com>
Tested-by: Kudu Jenkins
Reviewed-by: Andrew Wong <awong@cloudera.com>
Reviewed-by: Alexey Serbin <aserbin@cloudera.com>
(cherry picked from commit 70c2992bfa6658636939d4952794de882eff1037)
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/13098

docs/installation.adoc, after:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

[[installation]]
= Installing Apache Kudu

:author: Kudu Team
:imagesdir: ./images
:icons: font
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:doctype: book
:backend: html5
:sectlinks:
:experimental:

The Apache Kudu project only publishes source code releases, to deploy Kudu on a
cluster follow the steps below to build Kudu from source.

== Prerequisites and Requirements
.Hardware
- One or more hosts to run Kudu masters. It is recommended to have either one master (no fault
tolerance), or three masters (can tolerate one failure). The number of masters must be odd.
- One or more hosts to run Kudu tablet servers. When using replication, a minimum of three tablet
servers is necessary.

WARNING: A deployment with an even number of masters provides the same level of fault tolerance as a
deployment with one fewer master. For example, both four-master and three-master deployments can
only tolerate a single failure; two-master deployments cannot tolerate any failures.

.Operating System Requirements
Linux::
    - RHEL 6, RHEL 7, CentOS 6, CentOS 7, Ubuntu 14.04 (Trusty), Ubuntu 16.04 (Xenial), Debian 8 (Jessie), or SLES 12.
    - A kernel and filesystem that support _hole punching_. Hole punching is the use of the
      `fallocate(2)` system call with the `FALLOC_FL_PUNCH_HOLE` option set. See
      link:troubleshooting.html#req_hole_punching[troubleshooting hole punching] for more
      information.
    - ntp.
    - xfs or ext4 formatted drives.
    - Although not a strict requirement, it's highly recommended to use `nscd`
      to cache both DNS name resolution and static name resolution. See
      link:troubleshooting.html#slow_dns_nscd[troubleshooting slow DNS lookups]
      for more information.
macOS::
    - OS X 10.10 Yosemite, OS X 10.11 El Capitan, macOS Sierra, or macOS High Sierra.
Windows::
    - Microsoft Windows is unsupported.

.Storage
- If solid state storage is available, storing Kudu WALs on such high-performance
media may significantly improve latency when Kudu is configured for its highest
durability levels.

.Java
- JDK 7 or JDK 8 is required to build Kudu, but a JRE is not required at runtime
  except for tests.

[[build_from_source]]
== Build From Source

Below are the steps for each supported operating system to build Kudu from  source.

[WARNING]
.Known Build Issues
====
* It is not possible to build Kudu on Microsoft Windows.
* A C++11 capable compiler (GCC 4.8+) is required.
====

[[rhel_from_source]]
=== RHEL or CentOS
RHEL or CentOS 6.6 or later is required to build Kudu from source. To build
on a version older than 7.0, the Red Hat Developer Toolset must be installed
(in order to have access to a C++11 capable compiler).

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ sudo yum install autoconf automake cyrus-sasl-devel cyrus-sasl-gssapi \
  cyrus-sasl-plain flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1.8.0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-server krb5-workstation libtool make openssl-devel patch \
  pkgconfig redhat-lsb-core rsync unzip vim-common which
----

. If building on RHEL or CentOS older than 7.0, install the Red Hat Developer
Toolset.
+
----
$ DTLS_RPM=rhscl-devtoolset-3-epel-6-x86_64-1-2.noarch.rpm
$ DTLS_RPM_URL=https://www.softwarecollections.org/repos/rhscl/devtoolset-3/epel-6-x86_64/noarch/${DTLS_RPM}
$ wget ${DTLS_RPM_URL} -O ${DTLS_RPM}
$ sudo yum install -y scl-utils ${DTLS_RPM}
$ sudo yum install -y devtoolset-3-toolchain
----

. Optional: Install some additional packages, including ruby, if you plan to build documentation.
+
----
$ sudo yum install doxygen gem graphviz ruby-devel zlib-devel
----
NOTE: If building on RHEL or CentOS older than 7.0, the gem package may need to be replaced with rubygems

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script. Not using
the devtoolset will result in `Host compiler appears to require libatomic, but cannot find it.`
+
[source,bash]
----
$ build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

. Build Kudu, using the utilities installed in the previous step. Choose a build
directory for the intermediate output, which can be anywhere in your filesystem
except for the `kudu` directory itself. Notice that the devtoolset must still be specified,
else you'll get `cc1plus: error: unrecognized command line option "-std=c++11"`.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh \
  ../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----

. Optional: Install Kudu client libraries and headers.
If you do not specify an installation directory through the `DESTDIR`
environment variable, `/usr/local/` is the default.
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo make DESTDIR=/opt/kudu install
----
NOTE: 'make install' does not copy Kudu binaries. You need to manually copy them
as below:
* Copy the `kudu-tserver`, `kudu-master`, and `kudu` binaries from within the `bin`
subdirectory of your Kudu build directory.
* We typically recommend putting `kudu` in the bin directory (e.g. `/usr/bin`)
and the server binaries in the sbin directory (e.g. `/usr/sbin`).
* However, if you use the default installation directory without specifying the
`DESTDIR` environment variable, `make install` will install files into `/usr/local`,
so you should copy the Kudu binaries to `/usr/local/bin` and `/usr/local/sbin`
respectively.
. Optional: Build the documentation. NOTE: This command builds local documentation that
is not appropriate for uploading to the Kudu website.
+
----
$ make docs
----

.RHEL / CentOS Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on a
newly-installed RHEL or CentOS host, and can be used as the basis for an
automated deployment scenario. It skips the steps marked *Optional* above.

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

sudo yum -y install autoconf automake cyrus-sasl-devel cyrus-sasl-gssapi \
  cyrus-sasl-plain flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1.8.0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-server krb5-workstation libtool make openssl-devel patch pkgconfig \
  redhat-lsb-core rsync unzip vim-common which
DTLS_RPM=rhscl-devtoolset-3-epel-6-x86_64-1-2.noarch.rpm
DTLS_RPM_URL=https://www.softwarecollections.org/repos/rhscl/devtoolset-3/epel-6-x86_64/noarch/${DTLS_RPM}
wget ${DTLS_RPM_URL} -O ${DTLS_RPM}
sudo yum install -y scl-utils ${DTLS_RPM}
sudo yum install -y devtoolset-3-toolchain
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../build-support/enable_devtoolset.sh \
  ../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[ubuntu_from_source]]
=== Ubuntu or Debian

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ sudo apt-get install autoconf automake curl flex g++ gcc gdb git \
  krb5-admin-server krb5-kdc krb5-user libkrb5-dev libsasl2-dev libsasl2-modules \
  libsasl2-modules-gssapi-mit libssl-dev libtool lsb-release make ntp \
  openjdk-8-jdk openssl patch pkg-config python rsync unzip vim-common
----

. Optional: Install some additional packages, including ruby, if you plan to build documentation.
+
----
$ sudo apt-get install doxygen gem graphviz ruby-dev xsltproc zlib1g-dev
----

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

. Build Kudu, using the utilities installed in the previous step. Choose a build
directory for the intermediate output, which can be anywhere in your filesystem
except for the `kudu` directory itself.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release ../..
make -j4
----

. Optional: Install Kudu client libraries and headers.
If you do not specify an installation directory through the `DESTDIR`
environment variable, `/usr/local/` is the default.
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo make DESTDIR=/opt/kudu install
----
NOTE: 'make install' does not copy Kudu binaries. You need to manually copy them
as below:
* Copy the `kudu-tserver`, `kudu-master`, and `kudu` binaries from within the `bin`
subdirectory of your Kudu build directory.
* We typically recommend putting `kudu` in the bin directory (e.g. `/usr/bin`)
and the server binaries in the sbin directory (e.g. `/usr/sbin`).
* However, if you use the default installation directory without specifying the
`DESTDIR` environment variable, `make install` will install files into `/usr/local`,
so you should copy the Kudu binaries to `/usr/local/bin` and `/usr/local/sbin`
respectively.

. Optional: Build the documentation. NOTE: This command builds local documentation that
is not appropriate for uploading to the Kudu website.
+
----
$ make docs
----

.Ubuntu / Debian Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on Ubuntu, and
can be used as the basis for an automated deployment scenario. It skips
the steps marked *Optional* above.

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

sudo apt-get -y install autoconf automake curl flex g++ gcc gdb git \
  krb5-admin-server krb5-kdc krb5-user libkrb5-dev libsasl2-dev libsasl2-modules \
  libsasl2-modules-gssapi-mit libssl-dev libtool lsb-release make ntp \
  openjdk-8-jdk openssl patch pkg-config python rsync unzip vim-common
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[sles_from_source]]
=== SUSE Linux Enterprise Server

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ sudo zypper install autoconf automake curl cyrus-sasl-devel \
  cyrus-sasl-gssapi flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1_8_0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-devel krb5-server libtool lsb-release make ntp openssl-devel patch \
  pkg-config python rsync unzip vim
----

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

. Build Kudu, using the utilities installed in the previous step. Choose a build
directory for the intermediate output, which can be anywhere in your filesystem
except for the `kudu` directory itself.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----

. Optional: Install Kudu client libraries and headers.
If you do not specify an installation directory through the `DESTDIR`
environment variable, `/usr/local/` is the default.
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo make DESTDIR=/opt/kudu install
----
NOTE: 'make install' does not copy Kudu binaries. You need to manually copy them
as below:
* Copy the `kudu-tserver`, `kudu-master`, and `kudu` binaries from within the `bin`
subdirectory of your Kudu build directory.
* We typically recommend putting `kudu` in the bin directory (e.g. `/usr/bin`)
and the server binaries in the sbin directory (e.g. `/usr/sbin`).
* However, if you use the default installation directory without specifying the
`DESTDIR` environment variable, `make install` will install files into `/usr/local`,
so you should copy the Kudu binaries to `/usr/local/bin` and `/usr/local/sbin`
respectively.

.SLES Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on SLES, and
can be used as the basis for an automated deployment scenario. It skips
the steps marked *Optional* above.

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

sudo zypper install -y autoconf automake curl cyrus-sasl-devel \
  cyrus-sasl-gssapi flex gcc gcc-c++ gdb git java-1_8_0-openjdk-devel \
  krb5-devel libtool lsb-release make ntp openssl-devel patch \
  pkg-config python rsync unzip vim
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[osx_from_source]]
=== macOS
The link:https://developer.apple.com/xcode/[Xcode] package is necessary for
compiling Kudu. Some of the instructions below use link:http://brew.sh/[Homebrew]
to install dependencies, but manual dependency installation is possible.

After installing Xcode, don't forget to accept the license and install command-line
tools, if it's not done yet:
----
$ sudo xcodebuild -license
$ sudo xcode-select --install
----

[WARNING]
.macOS Known Issues
====
Kudu support for macOS is experimental, and should only be used for development.
See link:https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/KUDU-1219[macOS Limitations & Known Issues]
for more information.
====

. Install the prerequisite libraries, if they are not installed.
+
----
$ brew install autoconf automake cmake git krb5 libtool openssl pkg-config pstree
----

. Optional: Install some additional packages, including ruby, if you plan to build documentation.
+
----
$ brew install doxygen graphviz ruby
$ brew install gnu-sed --with-default-names #The macOS default sed handles the -i parameter differently
----

. Clone the Git repository and change to the new `kudu` directory.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
$ cd kudu
----

. Build any missing third-party requirements using the `build-if-necessary.sh` script.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----
  - If different versions of the dependencies are installed and used when calling
`thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh`, you may get stuck with output similar to the
following:
+
----
./configure: line 16299: error near unexpected token `newline'
./configure: line 16299: `  PKG_CHECK_MODULES('
----
+
The thirdparty builds may be cached and may reflect the incorrect versions of the
dependencies. Ensure that you have the correct dependencies listed in Step 1, clean
the workspace, and then try to re-build.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ git clean -fdx
$ thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
----

  - Some combinations of Homebrew installations and system upgrades can result with a
different kind of error:
+
----
libtool: Version mismatch error.  This is libtool 2.4.6, but the
libtool: definition of this LT_INIT comes from libtool 2.4.2.
libtool: You should recreate aclocal.m4 with macros from libtool 2.4.6
libtool: and run autoconf again.
----
+
As described in this link:https://github.com/Homebrew/legacy-homebrew/issues/43874[thread],
a possible fix is to uninstall and reinstall libtool:
+
[source,bash]
----
$ brew uninstall libtool && brew install libtool
----

. Build Kudu. Choose a build directory for the intermediate output, which can be
anywhere in your filesystem except for the `kudu` directory itself.
+
[source,bash]
----
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  -DOPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/opt/openssl \
  ../..
make -j4
----

.macOS Build Script
====
This script provides an overview of the procedure to build Kudu on macOS, and can
be used as the basis for an automated deployment scenario. It assumes Xcode and Homebrew
are installed.

----
#!/bin/bash

brew tap homebrew/dupes
brew install autoconf automake cmake git krb5 libtool openssl pkg-config pstree
git clone https://github.com/apache/kudu
cd kudu
thirdparty/build-if-necessary.sh
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
../../thirdparty/installed/common/bin/cmake \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=release \
  -DOPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/opt/openssl \
  ../..
make -j4
----
====

[[build_cpp_client]]
== Installing the C++ Client Libraries

See the Kudu client install section at the bottom of <<build_from_source>> above.

WARNING: Only build against the client libraries and headers (`kudu_client.so` and `client.h`).
Other libraries and headers are internal to Kudu and have no stability guarantees.

[[build_java_client]]
== Build the Java Client

.Requirements
- JDK 7 or JDK 8

WARNING: Support for Java 7 is deprecated as of Kudu 1.5.0 and may be removed in
the next major release.

To build the Java client, clone the Kudu Git
repository, change to the `java` directory, and issue the following command:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew assemble
----

For more information about building the Java API, as well as Eclipse integration,
see `java/README.md`.

[[view_api]]
== View API Documentation

// tag::view_api[]
.C++ API Documentation
You can view the link:../cpp-client-api/index.html[C++ client API
documentation] online. Alternatively, after
link:installation.html#build_from_source[building Kudu from source], you can
additionally build the `doxygen` target (e.g., run `make doxygen` if using
make) and use the locally generated API documentation by opening
`docs/doxygen/client_api/html/index.html` file in your favorite Web browser.

NOTE: In order to build the `doxygen` target, it's necessary to have
doxygen with Dot (graphviz) support installed at your build machine. If
you installed doxygen after building Kudu from source, you will need to run
`cmake` again to pick up the doxygen location and generate appropriate
targets.

.Java API Documentation
You can view the link:../apidocs/index.html[Java API documentation] online.
Alternatively, after link:installation.html#build_java_client[building the Java
client], Java API documentation is available in
`java/kudu-client/target/apidocs/index.html`.
// end::view_api[]

[[upgrade]]
== Upgrade from a Previous Version of Kudu

Before upgrading, you should read the link:release_notes.html[Release Notes] for
the version of Kudu that you are about to install. Pay close attention to the
incompatibilities, upgrade, and downgrade notes that are documented there.

NOTE: Currently rolling upgrades are not supported. Please shut down all Kudu services before
  upgrading the software.

[[next_steps]]
== Next Steps
- link:configuration.html[Configuring Kudu]
- link:administration.html[Kudu Administration]
