docs/scaling_guide.adoc, before:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

[[scaling]]
= Apache Kudu Scaling Guide

:author: Kudu Team
:imagesdir: ./images
:icons: font
:toc: left
:toclevels: 2
:doctype: book
:backend: html5
:sectlinks:
:experimental:

This document describes in detail how Kudu scales with respect to various system resources,
including memory, file descriptors, and threads. See the
link:known_issues.html#_scale[scaling limits] for the maximum recommended parameters of a Kudu
cluster. They can be used to estimate roughly the number of servers required for a given quantity
of data.

WARNING: The recommendations and conclusions here are only approximations. Appropriate numbers
depend on use case. There is no substitute for measurement and monitoring of resources used during a
representative workload.

== Terms

We will use the following terms:

* *hot replica*: A tablet replica that is continuously receiving writes. For example, in a time
series use case, tablet replicas for the most recent range partition on a time column would be
continuously receiving the latest data, and would be hot replicas.
* *cold replica*: A tablet replica that is not hot, i.e. a replica that is not frequently receiving
writes, for example, once every few minutes. A cold replica may be read from. For example, in a time
series use case, tablet replicas for previous range partitions on a time column would not receive
writes at all, or only occasionally receive late updates or additions, but may be constantly read.
* *data on disk*: The total amount of data stored on a tablet server across all disks,
post-replication, post-compression, and post-encoding.

== Example Workload

The sections below perform sample calculations using the following parameters:

* 200 hot replicas per tablet server
* 1600 cold replicas per tablet server
* 8TB of data on disk per tablet server (about 4.5GB/replica)
* 512MB block cache
* 40 cores per server
* limit of 32000 file descriptors per server
* a read workload with 1 frequently-scanned table with 40 columns

This workload resembles a time series use case, where the hot replicas correspond to the most recent
range partition on time.

[[memory]]
== Memory

The flag `--memory_limit_hard_bytes` determines the maximum amount of memory that a Kudu tablet
server may use. The amount of memory used by a tablet server scales with data size, write workload,
and read concurrency. The following table provides numbers that can be used to compute a rough
estimate of memory usage.

.Tablet Server Memory Usage
|===
| Type | Multiplier | Description

| Memory required per TB of data on disk | 1.5GB per 1TB data on disk | Amount of memory per unit of data on disk required for
basic operation of the tablet server.
| Hot Replicas' MemRowSets and DeltaMemStores | minimum 128MB per hot replica | Minimum amount of data
to flush per MemRowSet flush. For most use cases, updates should be rare compared to inserts, so the
DeltaMemStores should be very small.
| Scans | 256KB per column per core for read-heavy tables | Amount of memory used by scanners, and which
will be constantly needed for tables which are constantly read.
| Block Cache | Fixed by `--block_cache_capacity_mb` (default 512MB) | Amount of memory reserved for use by the
block cache.
|===

Using this information for the example load gives the following breakdown of memory usage:

.Example Tablet Server Memory Usage
|===
| Type | Amount

| 8TB data on disk | 8TB * 1.5GB / 1TB = 12GB
| 200 hot replicas | 200 * 128MB = 25.6GB
| 1 40-column, frequently-scanned table | 40 * 40 * 256KB = 409.6MB
| Block Cache | `--block_cache_capacity_mb=512` = 512MB
| Expected memory usage | 38.5GB
| Recommended hard limit | 52GB
|===

Using this as a rough estimate of Kudu's memory usage, select a memory limit so that the expected
memory usage of Kudu is around 50-75% of the hard limit.

=== Verifying if a Memory Limit is sufficient

After configuring an appropriate memory limit with `--memory_limit_hard_bytes`, run a workload and
monitor the Kudu tablet server process's RAM usage. The memory usage should stay around 50-75% of
the hard limit, with occasional spikes above 75% but below 100%. If the tablet server runs above 75%
consistently, the memory limit should be increased.

Additionally, it's also useful to monitor the logs for memory rejections, which look like:

----
Service unavailable: Soft memory limit exceeded (at 96.35% of capacity)
----

and watch the memory rejections metrics:

* `leader_memory_pressure_rejections`
* `follower_memory_pressure_rejections`
* `transaction_memory_pressure_rejections`

Occasional rejections due to memory pressure are fine and act as backpressure to clients. Clients
will transparently retry operations. However, no operations should time out.

[[file_descriptors]]
== File Descriptors

Processes are allotted a maximum number of open file descriptors (also referred to as fds). If a
tablet server attempts to open too many fds, it will typically crash with a message saying something
like "too many open files". The following table summarizes the sources of file descriptor usage in a
Kudu tablet server process:

.Tablet Server File Descriptor Usage
|===
| Type | Multiplier | Description

| File cache | Fixed by `--block_manager_max_open_files` (default 40% of process maximum) | Maximum allowed open fds reserved for use by
the file cache.
| Hot replicas | 2 per WAL segment, 1 per WAL index | Number of fds used by hot replicas. See below
for more explanation.
| Cold replicas | 3 per cold replica | Number of fds used per cold replica: 2 for the single WAL
segment and 1 for the single WAL index.
|===

Every replica has at least one WAL segment and at least one WAL index, and should have the same
number of segments and indices; however, the number of segments and indices can be greater for a
replica if one of its peer replicas is falling behind. WAL segment and index fds are closed as WALs
are garbage collected.

Using this information for the example load gives the following breakdown of file descriptor usage,
under the assumption that some replicas are lagging and using 10 WAL segments:

.Example Tablet Server File Descriptor Usage
|===
| Type | Amount

| file cache | 40% * 32000 fds = 12800 fds
| 1600 cold replicas | 1600 cold replicas * 3 fds / cold replica = 4800 fds
| 200 hot replicas | (2 / segment * 10 segments/hot replica * 200 hot replicas) + (1 / index * 10 indices / hot replica * 200 hot replicas) = 6000 fds
| Total | 23600 fds
|===

So for this example, the tablet server process has about 32000 - 23600 = 8400 fds to spare.

There is typically no downside to configuring a higher file descriptor limit if approaching the
currently configured limit.

[[threads]]
== Threads

Processes are allotted a maximum number of threads by the operating system, and this limit is
typically difficult or impossible to change. Therefore, this section is more informational than
advisory.

If a Kudu tablet server's thread count exceeds the OS limit, it will crash, usually with a message
in the logs like "pthread_create failed: Resource temporarily unavailable". If the system thread
count limit is exceeded, other processes on the same node may also crash.

The table below summarizes thread usage by a Kudu tablet server:

.Tablet Server Thread Usage
|===
| Consumer | Multiplier

| Hot replica | 5 threads per hot replica
| Cold replica | 2 threads per cold replica
| Replica at startup | 5 threads per replica
|===

As indicated in the table, all replicas may be considered "hot" when the tablet server starts, so,
for our example load, thread usage should peak around 5 threads / replica * (200 hot replicas + 1600
cold replicas) = 18000 threads at startup time.

Commit message:

docs: update release notes and scaling guide with new thread information
Change-Id: I6f6a39faa572e16805e1961105140d823bd82f40
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/9552
Reviewed-by: David Ribeiro Alves <davidralves@gmail.com>
Tested-by: Adar Dembo <adar@cloudera.com>

docs/scaling_guide.adoc, after:

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
// or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
// distributed with this work for additional information
// regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
// to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
// "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
// with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

[[scaling]]
= Apache Kudu Scaling Guide

:author: Kudu Team
:imagesdir: ./images
:icons: font
:toc: left
:toclevels: 2
:doctype: book
:backend: html5
:sectlinks:
:experimental:

This document describes in detail how Kudu scales with respect to various system resources,
including memory, file descriptors, and threads. See the
link:known_issues.html#_scale[scaling limits] for the maximum recommended parameters of a Kudu
cluster. They can be used to estimate roughly the number of servers required for a given quantity
of data.

WARNING: The recommendations and conclusions here are only approximations. Appropriate numbers
depend on use case. There is no substitute for measurement and monitoring of resources used during a
representative workload.

== Terms

We will use the following terms:

* *hot replica*: A tablet replica that is continuously receiving writes. For example, in a time
series use case, tablet replicas for the most recent range partition on a time column would be
continuously receiving the latest data, and would be hot replicas.
* *cold replica*: A tablet replica that is not hot, i.e. a replica that is not frequently receiving
writes, for example, once every few minutes. A cold replica may be read from. For example, in a time
series use case, tablet replicas for previous range partitions on a time column would not receive
writes at all, or only occasionally receive late updates or additions, but may be constantly read.
* *data on disk*: The total amount of data stored on a tablet server across all disks,
post-replication, post-compression, and post-encoding.

== Example Workload

The sections below perform sample calculations using the following parameters:

* 200 hot replicas per tablet server
* 1600 cold replicas per tablet server
* 8TB of data on disk per tablet server (about 4.5GB/replica)
* 512MB block cache
* 40 cores per server
* limit of 32000 file descriptors per server
* a read workload with 1 frequently-scanned table with 40 columns

This workload resembles a time series use case, where the hot replicas correspond to the most recent
range partition on time.

[[memory]]
== Memory

The flag `--memory_limit_hard_bytes` determines the maximum amount of memory that a Kudu tablet
server may use. The amount of memory used by a tablet server scales with data size, write workload,
and read concurrency. The following table provides numbers that can be used to compute a rough
estimate of memory usage.

.Tablet Server Memory Usage
|===
| Type | Multiplier | Description

| Memory required per TB of data on disk | 1.5GB per 1TB data on disk | Amount of memory per unit of data on disk required for
basic operation of the tablet server.
| Hot Replicas' MemRowSets and DeltaMemStores | minimum 128MB per hot replica | Minimum amount of data
to flush per MemRowSet flush. For most use cases, updates should be rare compared to inserts, so the
DeltaMemStores should be very small.
| Scans | 256KB per column per core for read-heavy tables | Amount of memory used by scanners, and which
will be constantly needed for tables which are constantly read.
| Block Cache | Fixed by `--block_cache_capacity_mb` (default 512MB) | Amount of memory reserved for use by the
block cache.
|===

Using this information for the example load gives the following breakdown of memory usage:

.Example Tablet Server Memory Usage
|===
| Type | Amount

| 8TB data on disk | 8TB * 1.5GB / 1TB = 12GB
| 200 hot replicas | 200 * 128MB = 25.6GB
| 1 40-column, frequently-scanned table | 40 * 40 * 256KB = 409.6MB
| Block Cache | `--block_cache_capacity_mb=512` = 512MB
| Expected memory usage | 38.5GB
| Recommended hard limit | 52GB
|===

Using this as a rough estimate of Kudu's memory usage, select a memory limit so that the expected
memory usage of Kudu is around 50-75% of the hard limit.

=== Verifying if a Memory Limit is sufficient

After configuring an appropriate memory limit with `--memory_limit_hard_bytes`, run a workload and
monitor the Kudu tablet server process's RAM usage. The memory usage should stay around 50-75% of
the hard limit, with occasional spikes above 75% but below 100%. If the tablet server runs above 75%
consistently, the memory limit should be increased.

Additionally, it's also useful to monitor the logs for memory rejections, which look like:

----
Service unavailable: Soft memory limit exceeded (at 96.35% of capacity)
----

and watch the memory rejections metrics:

* `leader_memory_pressure_rejections`
* `follower_memory_pressure_rejections`
* `transaction_memory_pressure_rejections`

Occasional rejections due to memory pressure are fine and act as backpressure to clients. Clients
will transparently retry operations. However, no operations should time out.

[[file_descriptors]]
== File Descriptors

Processes are allotted a maximum number of open file descriptors (also referred to as fds). If a
tablet server attempts to open too many fds, it will typically crash with a message saying something
like "too many open files". The following table summarizes the sources of file descriptor usage in a
Kudu tablet server process:

.Tablet Server File Descriptor Usage
|===
| Type | Multiplier | Description

| File cache | Fixed by `--block_manager_max_open_files` (default 40% of process maximum) | Maximum allowed open fds reserved for use by
the file cache.
| Hot replicas | 2 per WAL segment, 1 per WAL index | Number of fds used by hot replicas. See below
for more explanation.
| Cold replicas | 3 per cold replica | Number of fds used per cold replica: 2 for the single WAL
segment and 1 for the single WAL index.
|===

Every replica has at least one WAL segment and at least one WAL index, and should have the same
number of segments and indices; however, the number of segments and indices can be greater for a
replica if one of its peer replicas is falling behind. WAL segment and index fds are closed as WALs
are garbage collected.

Using this information for the example load gives the following breakdown of file descriptor usage,
under the assumption that some replicas are lagging and using 10 WAL segments:

.Example Tablet Server File Descriptor Usage
|===
| Type | Amount

| file cache | 40% * 32000 fds = 12800 fds
| 1600 cold replicas | 1600 cold replicas * 3 fds / cold replica = 4800 fds
| 200 hot replicas | (2 / segment * 10 segments/hot replica * 200 hot replicas) + (1 / index * 10 indices / hot replica * 200 hot replicas) = 6000 fds
| Total | 23600 fds
|===

So for this example, the tablet server process has about 32000 - 23600 = 8400 fds to spare.

There is typically no downside to configuring a higher file descriptor limit if approaching the
currently configured limit.

[[threads]]
== Threads

Processes are allotted a maximum number of threads by the operating system, and this limit is
typically difficult or impossible to change. Therefore, this section is more informational than
advisory.

If a Kudu tablet server's thread count exceeds the OS limit, it will crash, usually with a message
in the logs like "pthread_create failed: Resource temporarily unavailable". If the system thread
count limit is exceeded, other processes on the same node may also crash.

Threads and threadpools are used all over Kudu for various purposes, but the number of threads found
in nearly all of these does not scale with load or data/tablet size; instead, the number of threads
is either a hardcoded constant, a constant defined by a configuration parameter, or based on a
static dimension (such as the number of CPU cores).

The only exception to this is the WAL append thread, one of which exists for every "hot" replica.
Note that all replicas may be considered hot at startup, so tablet servers' thread usage will
generally peak when started and settle down thereafter.
