examples/python/basic-python-example/README.md, before:

<!---
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Basic Kudu-Python Example
This is a very basic example of usage for the Kudu Python client.
It demonstrates much of the standard capabilities within the client.

## To install the Python client

### Building from source
_NOTE:_ This example is pointing to the latest build, which is often
times a debug build. If this is not the desired approach, you will
need to point this to the release build.
```
export KUDU_HOME=/path/to/kudu
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
# For OS X
export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py build_ext --inplace
python setup.py install
```

### Installing from pypi
_NOTE:_ This example is pointing to the latest build, which is often
times a debug build. If this is not the desired approach, you will
need to point this to the release build.
```
export KUDU_HOME=/path/to/kudu
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
# For OS X
export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
pip install kudu-python
```

## Running the example

```
./basic_example.py --masters master1.address --ports 7051
```

Commit message:

[examples] updated README.md for basic-python-example
Change-Id: I103dde66b69db17099b94d66777df37abb4f9fa8
Reviewed-on: http://gerrit.cloudera.org:8080/12458
Tested-by: Kudu Jenkins
Reviewed-by: Alexey Serbin <aserbin@cloudera.com>

examples/python/basic-python-example/README.md, after:

<!---
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Basic Kudu-Python example
This is a very basic example of usage for the Kudu Python client.
It demonstrates much of the standard capabilities within the client.

## To install the Python client

### Building from source
It's assumed the commands below are run from the directory where
this README.md file is located, i.e. from
`$KUDU_HOME/examples/python/basic-python-example`.

_NOTE:_ This example assumes that all Kudu C++ components are already
built in `$KUDU_HOME/build/latest`. That directory is pointing to the
latest build, which is often times a debug build. If this is not the
desired approach, you will need to point the `latest` symbolic link
to the release build Kudu directory.

```
export KUDU_HOME=/path/to/kudu
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
# For OS X
export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
pushd $KUDU_HOME/python
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py build_ext --inplace
python setup.py install
popd
```

### Installing from pypi
_NOTE:_ This example is pointing to the latest build, which is often
times a debug build. If this is not the desired approach, you will
need to point this to the release build.
```
export KUDU_HOME=/path/to/kudu
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
# For OS X
export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=$KUDU_HOME/build/latest/lib/exported
pip install kudu-python
```

## Running the example
```
python basic_example.py --masters master1.address --ports 7051
```
